WATCHMAN I pray the gods to quit me of my toils, 
To close the watch I keep, this livelong year; 
For as a watch-dog lying, not at rest, 
Propped on one arm, upon the palace-roof 
Of Atreus' race, too long, too well I know 
The starry conclave of the midnight sky, 
Too well, the splendours of the firmament, 
The lords of light, whose kingly aspect shows- 
What time they set or climb the sky in turn- 
The year's divisions, bringing frost or fire. 

And now, as ever, am I set to mark 
When shall stream up the glow of signal-flame, 
The bale-fire bright, and tell its Trojan tale- 
Troy town is ta'en: such issue holds in hope 
She in whose woman's breast beats heart of man. 

Thus upon mine unrestful couch I lie, 
Bathed with the dews of night, unvisited 
By dreams-ah me!-for in the place of sleep 
Stands Fear as my familiar, and repels 
The soft repose that would mine eyelids seal. 

And if at whiles, for the lost balm of sleep, 
I medicine my soul with melody 
Of trill or song-anon to tears I turn, 
Wailing the woe that broods upon this home, 
Not now by honour guided as of old- 

But now at last fair fall the welcome hour 
That sets me free, whene'er the thick night glow 
With beacon-fire of hope deferred no more. 
All hail!  (A beacon-light is seen reddening the distant sky.)  Fire
of the night, that brings my spirit day, 
Shedding on Argos light, and dance, and song, 
Greetings to fortune, hail! 

Let my loud summons ring within the ears 
Of Agamemnon's queen, that she anon 
Start from her couch and with a shrill voice cry 
A joyous welcome to the beacon-blaze, 
For Ilion's fall; such fiery message gleams 
From yon high flame; and I, before the rest, 
Will foot the lightsome measure of our joy; 
For I can say, My master's dice fell fair- 
Behold! the triple sice, the lucky flame! 
Now be my lot to clasp, in loyal love, 
The hand of him restored, who rules our home: 
Home-but I say no more: upon my tongue 
Treads hard the ox o' the adage. 

Had it voice, 
The home itself might soothliest tell its tale; 
I, of set will, speak words the wise may learn, 
To others, nought remember nor discern.  (He withdraws. The CHORUS
OF ARGIVE ELDERS enters, each leaning on a staff. During their song
CLYTEMNESTRA appears in the background, kindling the altars.)

CHORUS  (singing) Ten livelong years have rolled away, 
Since the twin lords of sceptred sway, 
By Zeus endowed with pride of place, 
The doughty chiefs of Atreus' race, 
Went forth of yore, 
To plead with Priam, face to face, 
Before the judgment-seat of War! 

A thousand ships from Argive land 
Put forth to bear the martial band, 
That with a spirit stern and strong 
Went out to right the kingdom's wrong- 
Pealed, as they went, the battle-song, 
Wild as the vultures' cry; 
When o'er the eyrie, soaring high, 
In wild bereaved agony, 
Around, around, in airy rings, 
They wheel with oarage of their wings, 
But not the eyas-brood behold, 
That called them to the nest of old; 
But let Apollo from the sky, 
Or Pan, or Zeus, but hear the cry, 
The exile cry, the wail forlorn, 
Of birds from whom their home is torn- 
On those who wrought the rapine fell, 

Heaven sends the vengeful fiends of hell. 
Even so doth Zeus, the jealous lord 
And guardian of the hearth and board, 
Speed Atreus' sons, in vengeful ire, 
'Gainst Paris-sends them forth on fire, 
Her to buy back, in war and blood, 
Whom one did wed but many woo'd! 
And many, many, by his will, 
The last embrace of foes shall feel, 
And many a knee in dust be bowed, 
And splintered spears on shields ring loud, 
Of Trojan and of Greek, before 
That iron bridal-feast be o'er! 
But as he willed 'tis ordered all, 
And woes, by heaven ordained, must fall- 
Unsoothed by tears or spilth of wine 
Poured forth too late, the wrath divine 
Glares vengeance on the flameless shrine. 

And we in grey dishonoured eld, 
Feeble of frame, unfit were held 
To join the warrior array 
That then went forth unto the fray: 
And here at home we tarry, fain 
Our feeble footsteps to sustain, 
Each on his staff-so strength doth wane, 
And turns to childishness again. 
For while the sap of youth is green, 
And, yet unripened, leaps within, 
The young are weakly as the old, 
And each alike unmeet to hold 
The vantage post of war! 
And ah! when flower and fruit are o'er, 
And on life's tree the leaves are sere, 
Age wendeth propped its journey drear, 
As forceless as a child, as light 
And fleeting as a dream of night 
Lost in the garish day! 
But thou, O child of Tyndareus, 
Queen Clytemnestra, speak! and say 
What messenger of joy to-day 
Hath won thine ear? what welcome news, 
That thus in sacrificial wise 
E'en to the city's boundaries 
Thou biddest altar-fires arise? 
Each god who doth our city guard, 
And keeps o'er Argos watch and ward 
From heaven above, from earth below- 
The mighty lords who rule the skies, 
The market's lesser deities, 
To each and all the altars glow, 
Piled for the sacrifice! 
And here and there, anear, afar, 
Streams skyward many a beacon-star, 
Conjur'd and charm'd and kindled well 
By pure oil's soft and guileless spell, 
Hid now no more 
Within the palace' secret store. 

O queen, we pray thee, whatsoe'er, 
Known unto thee, were well revealed, 
That thou wilt trust it to our ear, 
And bid our anxious heart be healed! 
That waneth now unto despair- 
Now, waxing to a presage fair, 
Dawns, from the altar, to scare 
From our rent hearts the vulture Care. 

(strophe 1)

List! for the power is mine, to chant on high 
The chiefs' emprise, the strength that omens gave! 
List! on my soul breathes yet a harmony, 
From realms of ageless powers, and strong to save! 

How brother kings, twin lords of one command, 
Led forth the youth of Hellas in their flower, 
Urged on their way, with vengeful spear and brand, 
By warrior-birds, that watched the parting hour. 

Go forth to Troy, the eagles seemed to cry- 
And the sea-kings obeyed the sky-kings' word, 
When on the right they soared across the sky, 
And one was black, one bore a white tail barred. 

High o'er the palace were they seen to soar, 
Then lit in sight of all, and rent and tare, 
Far from the fields that she should range no more, 
Big with her unborn brood, a mother-hare. 

Ah woe and well-a-day! but be the issue fair! 

(antistrophe 1)

And one beheld, the soldier-prophet true, 
And the two chiefs, unlike of soul and will, 
In the twy-coloured eagles straight he knew, 
And spake the omen forth, for good and in. 

Go forth, he cried, and Priam's town shall fall. 
Yet long the time shall be; and flock and herd, 
The people's wealth, that roam before the wall, 
Shall force hew down, when Fate shall give the word, 

But O beware! lest wrath in Heaven abide, 
To dim the glowing battle-forge once more, 
And mar the mighty curb of Trojan pride, 
The steel of vengeance, welded as for war! 

For virgin Artemis bears jealous hate 
Against the royal house, the eagle-pair, 
Who rend the unborn brood, insatiate- 
Yea, loathes their banquet on the quivering hare. 

Ah woe and well-a-day! but be the issue fair! 

(epode)

For well she loves-the goddess kind and mild- 
The tender new-born cubs of lions bold, 
Too weak to range-and well the sucking child 
Of every beast that roams by wood and wold. 

So to the Lord of Heaven she prayeth still, 
"Nay, if it must be, be the omen true! 
Yet do the visioned eagles presage ill; 
The end be well, but crossed with evil too!" 

Healer Apollo! be her wrath controll'd 
Nor weave the long delay of thwarting gales, 
To war against the Danaans and withhold 
From the free ocean-waves their eager sails! 

She craves, alas! to see a second life 
Shed forth, a curst unhallowed sacrifice- 
'Twixt wedded souls, artificer of strife, 
And hate that knows not fear, and fell device. 

At home there tarries like a lurking snake, 
Biding its time, a wrath unreconciled, 
A wily watcher, passionate to slake, 
In blood, resentment for a murdered child. 

Such was the mighty warning, pealed of yore- 
Amid good tidings, such the word of fear, 
What time the fateful eagles hovered o'er 
The kings, and Calchas read the omen clear. 

In strains like his, once more, 
Sing woe and well-a-day! but be the issue fair! 

(strophe 2)

Zeus-if to The Unknown 
That name of many names seem good- 
Zeus, upon Thee I call. 
Thro' the mind's every road 
I passed, but vain are all, 
Save that which names thee Zeus, the Highest One, 
Were it but mine to cast away the load, 
The weary load, that weighs my spirit down. 

(antistrophe 2)

He that was Lord of old, 
In full-blown pride of place and valour bold, 
Hath fallen and is gone, even as an old tale told: 
And he that next held sway, 
By stronger grasp o'erthrown 
Hath pass'd away! 
And whoso now shall bid the triumph-chant arise 
To Zeus, and Zeus alone, 
He shall be found the truly wise. 

(strophe 3)

'Tis Zeus alone who shows the perfect way 
Of knowledge: He hath ruled, 
Men shall learn wisdom, by affliction schooled. 

In visions of the night, like dropping rain, 
Descend the many memories of pain 
Before the spirit's sight: through tears and dole 
Comes wisdom o'er the unwilling soul- 
A boon, I wot, of all Divinity, 
That holds its sacred throne in strength, above the sky!

(antistrophe 3)

And then the elder chief, at whose command 
The fleet of Greece was manned, 
Cast on the seer no word of hate, 
But veered before the sudden breath of Fate- 

Ah, weary while! for, ere they put forth sail, 
Did every store, each minish'd vessel, fail, 
While all the Achaean host 
At Aulis anchored lay, 
Looking across to Chalcis and the coast 
Where refluent waters welter, rock, and sway; 

(strophe 4)

And rife with ill delay 
From northern Strymon blew the thwarting blast- 
Mother of famine fell, 
That holds men wand'ring still 
Far from the haven where they fain would be!- 
And pitiless did waste 
Each ship and cable, rotting on the sea, 
And, doubling with delay each weary hour, 
Withered with hope deferred th' Achaeans' warlike flower.

But when, for bitter storm, a deadlier relief, 
And heavier with ill to either chief, 
Pleading the ire of Artemis, the seer avowed, 
The two Atreidae smote their sceptres on the plain, 
And, striving hard, could not their tears restrain! 

(antistrophe 4)

And then the elder monarch spake aloud- 
Ill lot were mine, to disobey! 
And ill, to smite my child, my household's love and pride!

To stain with virgin blood a father's hands, and slay 
My daughter, by the altar's side! 
'Twixt woe and woe I dwell- 
I dare not like a recreant fly, 
And leave the league of ships, and fail each true ally; 
For rightfully they crave, with eager fiery mind, 
The virgin's blood, shed forth to lull the adverse wind-

God send the deed be well! 

(strophe 5)

Thus on his neck he took 
Fate's hard compelling yoke; 
Then, in the counter-gale of will abhorr'd, accursed, 
To recklessness his shifting spirit veered- 
Alas! that Frenzy, first of ills and worst, 
With evil craft men's souls to sin hath ever stirred! 

And so he steeled his heart-ah, well-a-day- 
Aiding a war for one false woman's sake, 
His child to slay, 
And with her spilt blood make 
An offering, to speed the ships upon their way! 

(antistrophe 5)

Lusting for war, the bloody arbiters 
Closed heart and ears, and would nor hear nor heed 
The girl-voice plead, 
Pity me, Father! nor her prayers, 
Nor tender, virgin years. 
So, when the chant of sacrifice was done, 
Her father bade the youthful priestly train 
Raise her, like some poor kid, above the altar-stone, 
From where amid her robes she lay 
Sunk all in swoon away- 
Bade them, as with the bit that mutely tames the steed, 
Her fair lips' speech refrain, 
Lest she should speak a curse on Atreus' home and seed, 

(strophe 6)

So, trailing on the earth her robe of saffron dye, 
With one last piteous dart from her beseeching eye. 
Those that should smite she smote 
Fair, silent, as a pictur'd form, but fain 
To plead, Is all forgot? 
How oft those halls of old, 
Wherein my sire high feast did hold, 
Rang to the virginal soft strain, 
When I, a stainless child, 
Sang from pure lips and undefiled, 
Sang of my sire, and all 
His honoured life, and how on him should fall 
Heaven's highest gift and gain! 

(antistrophe 6)

And then-but I beheld not, nor can tell, 
What further fate befell: 
But this is sure, that Calchas' boding strain 
Can ne'er be void or vain. 
This wage from justice' hand do sufferers earn, 
The future to discern: 
And yet-farewell, O secret of To-morrow! 
Fore-knowledge is fore-sorrow. 
Clear with the clear beams of the morrow's sun, 
The future presseth on. 
Now, let the house's tale, how dark soe'er, 
Find yet an issue fair!- 
So prays the loyal, solitary band 
That guards the Apian land.  (They turn to CLYTEMNESTRA, who leaves
the altars and comes forward.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O queen, I come in reverence of thy sway-

For, while the ruler's kingly seat is void, 
The loyal heart before his consort bends. 
Now-be it sure and certain news of good, 
Or the fair tidings of a flatt'ring hope, 
That bids thee spread the light from shrine to shrine, 
I, fain to hear, yet grudge not if thou hide. 

CLYTEMNESTRA As saith the adage, From the womb of Night

Spring forth, with promise fair, the young child Light. 
Ay-fairer even than all hope my news- 
By Grecian hands is Priam's city ta'en! 

LEADER What say'st thou? doubtful heart makes treach'rous ear.

CLYTEMNESTRA Hear then again, and plainly-Troy is ours!

LEADER Thrills thro' heart such joy as wakens tears. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Ay, thro' those tears thine eye looks loyalty.

LEADER But hast thou proof, to make assurance sure? 

CLYTEMNESTRA Go to; I have-unless the god has lied. 

LEADER Hath some night-vision won thee to belief? 

CLYTEMNESTRA Out on all presage of a slumb'rous soul! 

LEADER But wert thou cheered by Rumour's wingless word?

CLYTEMNESTRA Peace-thou dost chide me as a credulous girl.

LEADER Say then, how long ago the city fell? 

CLYTEMNESTRA Even in this night that now brings forth the dawn.

LEADER Yet who so swift could speed the message here? 

CLYTEMNESTRA From Ida's top Hephaestus, lord of fire, 
Sent forth his sign; and on, and ever on, 
Beacon to beacon sped the courier-flame. 
From Ida to the crag, that Hermes loves, 
Of Lemnos; thence unto the steep sublime 
Of Athos, throne of Zeus, the broad blaze flared. 
Thence, raised aloft to shoot across the sea, 
The moving light, rejoicing in its strength, 
Sped from the pyre of pine, and urged its way, 
In golden glory, like some strange new sun, 
Onward, and reached Macistus' watching heights. 
There, with no dull delay nor heedless sleep, 
The watcher sped the tidings on in turn, 
Until the guard upon Messapius' peak 
Saw the far flame gleam on Euripus' tide, 
And from the high-piled heap of withered furze 
Lit the new sign and bade the message on. 
Then the strong light, far-flown and yet undimmed, 
Shot thro' the sky above Asopus' plain, 
Bright as the moon, and on Cithaeron's crag 
Aroused another watch of flying fire. 
And there the sentinels no whit disowned, 
But sent redoubled on, the hest of flame 
Swift shot the light, above Gorgopis' bay, 
To Aegiplanctus' mount, and bade the peak 
Fail not the onward ordinance of fire. 
And like a long beard streaming in the wind, 
Full-fed with fuel, roared and rose the blaze, 
And onward flaring, gleamed above the cape, 
Beneath which shimmers the Saronic bay, 
And thence leapt light unto Arachne's peak, 
The mountain watch that looks upon our town. 
Thence to th' Atreides' roof-in lineage fair, 
A bright posterity of Ida's fire. 
So sped from stage to stage, fulfilled in turn, 
Flame after flame, along the course ordained, 
And lo! the last to speed upon its way 
Sights the end first, and glows unto the goal. 
And Troy is ta'en, and by this sign my lord 
Tells me the tale, and ye have learned my word. 

LEADER To heaven, O queen, will I upraise new song: 
But, wouldst thou speak once more, I fain would hear 
From first to last the marvel of the tale. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Think you-this very morn-the Greeks in Troy,

And loud therein the voice of utter wail! 
Within one cup pour vinegar and oil, 
And look! unblent, unreconciled, they war. 
So in the twofold issue of the strife 
Mingle the victor's shout, the captives' moan. 
For all the conquered whom the sword has spared 
Cling weeping-some unto a brother slain, 
Some childlike to a nursing father's form, 
And wail the loved and lost, the while their neck 
Bows down already 'neath the captive's chain. 
And lo! the victors, now the fight is done, 
Goaded by restless hunger, far and wide 
Range all disordered thro' the town, to snatch 
Such victual and such rest as chance may give 
Within the captive halls that once were Troy- 
Joyful to rid them of the frost and dew, 
Wherein they couched upon the plain of old- 
Joyful to sleep the gracious night all through, 
Unsummoned of the watching sentinel. 
Yet let them reverence well the city's gods, 
The lords of Troy, tho' fallen, and her shrines; 
So shall the spoilers not in turn be spoiled. 
Yea, let no craving for forbidden gain 
Bid conquerors yield before the darts of greed. 
For we need yet, before the race be won, 
Homewards, unharmed, to round the course once more. 
For should the host wax wanton ere it come, 
Then, tho'the sudden blow of fate be spared, 
Yet in the sight of gods shall rise once more 
The great wrong of the slain, to claim revenge. 
Now, hearing from this woman's mouth of mine, 
The tale and eke its warning, pray with me, 
Luck sway the scale, with no uncertain poise, 
For my fair hopes are changed to fairer joys. 

LEADER A gracious word thy woman's lips have told, 
Worthy a wise man's utterance, O my queen; 
Now with clear trust in thy convincing tale 
I set me to salute the gods with song, 
Who bring us bliss to counterpoise our pain.  (CLYTEMNESTRA goes into
the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Zeus, Lord of heaven! and welcome night

Of victory, that hast our might 
With all the glories crowned! 
On towers of Ilion, free no more, 
Hast flung the mighty mesh of war, 
And closely girt them round, 
Till neither warrior may 'scape, 
Nor stripling lightly overleap 
The trammels as they close, and close, 
Till with the grip of doom our foes 
In slavery's coil are bound! 

Zeus, Lord of hospitality, 
In grateful awe I bend to thee- 
'Tis thou hast struck the blow! 
At Alexander, long ago, 
We marked thee bend thy vengeful bow, 
But long and warily withhold 
The eager shaft, which, uncontrolled 
And loosed too soon or launched too high, 
Had wandered bloodless through the sky. 

(strophe 1)

Zeus, the high God!-whate'er be dim in doubt, 
This can our thought track out- 
The blow that fells the sinner is of God, 
And as he wills, the rod 
Of vengeance smiteth sore. One said of old, 
The gods list not to hold 
A reckoning with him whose feet oppress 
The grace of holiness- 
An impious word! for whenso'er the sire 
Breathed forth rebellious fire- 
What time his household overflowed the measure 
Of bliss and health and treasure- 
His children's children read the reckoning plain, 
At last, in tears and pain. 
On me let weal that brings no woe be sent, 
And therewithal, content! 
Who spurns the shrine of Right, nor wealth nor power 
Shall be to him a tower, 
To guard him from the gulf: there lies his lot, 
Where all things are forgot. 

(antistrophe 1)

Lust drives him on-lust, desperate and wild, 
Fate's sin-contriving child- 
And cure is none; beyond concealment clear, 
Kindles sin's baleful glare. 
As an ill coin beneath the wearing touch 
Betrays by stain and smutch 
Its metal false-such is the sinful wight. 
Before, on pinions light, 
Fair Pleasure flits, and lures him childlike on, 
While home and kin make moan 
Beneath the grinding burden of his crime; 
Till, in the end of time, 
Cast down of heaven, he pours forth fruitless prayer 
To powers that will not hear. 

And such did Paris come 
Unto Atreides' home, 
And thence, with sin and shame his welcome to repay, 
Ravished the wife away- 

(strophe 2)

And she, unto her country and her kin 
Leaving the clash of shields and spears and arming ships,

And bearing unto Troy destruction for a dower, 
And overbold in sin, 
Went fleetly thro' the gates, at midnight hour. 
Oft from the prophets' lips 
Moaned out the warning and the wail-Ah woe! 
Woe for the home, the home! and for the chieftains, woe!

Woe for the bride-bed, warm 
Yet from the lovely limbs, the impress of the form 
Of her who loved her lord, awhile ago 
And woe! for him who stands 
Shamed, silent, unreproachful, stretching hands 
That find her not, and sees, yet will not see, 
That she is far away! 
And his sad fancy, yearning o'er the sea, 
Shall summon and recall 
Her wraith, once more to queen it in his hall. 
And sad with many memories, 
The fair cold beauty of each sculptured face- 
And all to hatefulness is turned their grace, 
Seen blankly by forlorn and hungering eyes! 

(antistrophe 2)

And when the night is deep, 
Come visions, sweet and sad, and bearing pain 
Of hopings vain- 
Void, void and vain, for scarce the sleeping sight 
Has seen its old delight, 
When thro' the grasps of love that bid it stay 
It vanishes away 
On silent wings that roam adown the ways of sleep. 

Such are the sights, the sorrows fell, 
About our hearth-and worse, whereof I may not tell. 
But, all the wide town o'er, 
Each home that sent its master far away 
From Hellas' shore, 
Feels the keen thrill of heart, the pang of loss, to-day.

For, truth to say, 
The touch of bitter death is manifold! 
Familiar was each face, and dear as life, 
That went unto the war, 
But thither, whence a warrior went of old, 
Doth nought return- 
Only a spear and sword, and ashes in an urn! 

(strophe 3)

For Ares, lord of strife, 
Who doth the swaying scales of battle hold, 
War's money-changer, giving dust for gold, 
Sends back, to hearts that held them dear, 
Scant ash of warriors, wept with many a tear, 
Light to the band, but heavy to the soul; 
Yea, fills the light urn full 
With what survived the flame- 
Death's dusty measure of a hero's frame! 

Alas! one cries, and yet alas again! 
Our chief is gone, the hero of the spear, 
And hath not left his peer! 
Ah woe! another moans-my spouse is slain, 
The death of honour, rolled in dust and blood, 
Slain for a woman's sin, a false wife's shame! 
Such muttered words of bitter mood 
Rise against those who went forth to reclaim; 
Yea, jealous wrath creeps on against th' Atreides' name.

And others, far beneath the Ilian wall, 
Sleep their last sleep-the goodly chiefs and tall, 
Couched in the foeman's land, whereon they gave 
Their breath, and lords of Troy, each in his Trojan grave.

(antistrophe 3)

Therefore for each and all the city's breast 
Is heavy with a wrath supprest, 
As deeply and deadly as a curse more loud 
Flung by the common crowd: 
And, brooding deeply, doth my soul await 
Tidings of coming fate, 
Buried as yet in darkness' womb. 
For not forgetful is the high gods' doom 
Against the sons of carnage: all too long 
Seems the unjust to prosper and be strong, 
Till the dark Furies come, 
And smite with stern reversal all his home, 
Down into dim obstruction-he is gone, 
And help and hope, among the lost, is none! 

O'er him who vaunteth an exceeding fame, 
Impends a woe condign; 
The vengeful bolt upon his eyes doth flame, 
Sped from the hand divine. 
This bliss be mine, ungrudged of God, to feel- 
To tread no city to the dust, 
Nor see my own life thrust 
Down to a glave's estate beneath another's heel! 

(epode)

Behold, throughout the city wide 
Have the swift feet of Rumour hied, 
Roused by the joyful flame: 
But is the news they scatter, sooth? 
Or haply do they give for truth 
Some cheat which heaven doth frame? 
A child were he and all unwise, 
Who let his heart with joy be stirred. 
To see the beacon-fires arise, 
And then, beneath some thwarting word, 
Sicken anon with hope deferred. 
The edge of woman's insight still 
Good news from true divideth ill; 
Light rumours leap within the bound 
Then fences female credence round, 
But, lightly born, as lightly dies 
The tale that springs of her surmise.  (Several days are assumed to
have elapsed.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Soon shall we know whereof the bale-fires tell,

The beacons, kindled with transmitted flame; 
Whether, as well I deem, their tale is true, 
Or whether like some dream delusive came 
The welcome blaze but to befool our soul. 
For lo! I see a herald from the shore 
Draw hither, shadowed with the olive-wreath- 
And thirsty dust, twin-brother of the clay, 
Speaks plain of travel far and truthful news- 
No dumb surmise, nor tongue of flame in smoke, 
Fitfully kindled from the mountain pyre; 
But plainlier shall his voice say, All is well, 
Or-but away, forebodings adverse, now, 
And on fair promise fair fulfilment come! 
And whoso for the state prays otherwise, 
Himself reap harvest of his ill desire!  (A HERALD enters. He is an
advance messenger from AGAMEMNON'S forces, which have just landed.)

HERALD O land of Argos, fatherland of mine! 
To thee at last, beneath the tenth year's sun, 
My feet return; the bark of my emprise, 
Tho' one by one hope's anchors broke away, 
Held by the last, and now rides safely here. 
Long, long my soul despaired to win, in death, 
Its longed-for rest within our Argive land: 
And now all hail, O earth, and hail to thee, 
New-risen sun! and hail our country's God, 
High-ruling Zeus, and thou, the Pythian lord, 
Whose arrows smote us once-smite thou no morel 
Was not thy wrath wreaked full upon our heads, 
O king Apollo, by Scamander's side? 
Turn thou, be turned, be saviour, healer, now 
And hail, all gods who rule the street and mart 
And Hermes hail! my patron and my pride, 
Herald of heaven, and lord of heralds here! 
And Heroes, ye who sped us on our way- 
To one and all I cry, Receive again 
With grace such Argives as the spear has spared. 

Ah, home of royalty, beloved halls, 
And solemn shrines, and gods that front the morn! 
Benign as erst, with sun-flushed aspect greet 
The king returning after many days. 
For as from night flash out the beams of day, 
So out of darkness dawns a light, a king, 
On you, on Argos-Agamemnon comes. 
Then hail and greet him well I such meed befits 
Him whose right hand hewed down the towers of Troy 
With the great axe of Zeus who righteth wrong- 
And smote the plain, smote down to nothingness 
Each altar, every shrine; and far and wide 
Dies from the whole land's face its offspring fair. 
Such mighty yoke of fate he set on Troy- 
Our lord and monarch, Atreus' elder son, 
And comes at last with blissful honour home; 
Highest of all who walk on earth to-day- 
Not Paris nor the city's self that paid 
Sin's price with him, can boast, Whate'er befall, 
The guerdon we have won outweighs it all. 
But at Fate's judgment-seat the robber stands 
Condemned of rapine, and his prey is torn 
Forth from his hands, and by his deed is reaped 
A bloody harvest of his home and land 
Gone down to death, and for his guilt and lust 
His father's race pays double in the dust. 

LEADER Hail, herald of the Greeks, new-come from war. 

HERALD All hail! not death itself can fright me now. 

LEADER Was thine heart wrung with longing for thy land?

HERALD So that this joy doth brim mine eyes with tears.

LEADER On you too then this sweet distress did fall- 

HERALD How say'st thou? make me master of thy word. 

LEADER You longed for us who pined for you again. 

HERALD Craved the land us who craved it, love for love?

LEADER Yea, till my brooding heart moaned out with pain.

HERALD Whence thy despair, that mars the army's joy? 

LEADER Sole cure of wrong is silence, saith the saw. 

HERALD Thy kings afar, couldst thou fear other men? 

LEADER Death had been sweet, as thou didst say but now.

HERALD 'Tis true; Fate smiles at last. Throughout our toil,

These many years, some chances issued fair, 
And some, I wot, were chequered with a curse. 
But who, on earth, hath won the bliss of heaven, 
Thro' time's whole tenor an unbroken weal? 
I could a tale unfold of toiling oars, 
Ill rest, scant landings on a shore rock-strewn, 
All pains, all sorrows, for our daily doom. 
And worse and hatefuller our woes on land; 
For where we couched, close by the foeman's wall, 
The river-plain was ever dank with dews, 
Dropped from the sky, exuded from the earth, 
A curse that clung unto our sodden garb, 
And hair as horrent as a wild beast's fell. 
Why tell the woes of winter, when the birds 
Lay stark and stiff, so stern was Ida's snow? 
Or summer's scorch, what time the stirless wave 
Sank to its sleep beneath the noon-day sun? 
Why mourn old woes? their pain has passed away; 
And passed away, from those who fell, all care, 
For evermore, to rise and live again. 
Why sum the count of death, and render thanks 
For life by moaning over fate malign? 
Farewell, a long farewell to all our woes! 
To us, the remnant of the host of Greece, 
Comes weal beyond all counterpoise of woe; 
Thus boast we rightfully to yonder sun, 
Like him far-fleeted over sea and land. 
The Argive host prevailed to conquer Troy, 
And in the temples of the gods of Greece 
Hung up these spoils, a shining sign to Time. 
Let those who learn this legend bless aright 
The city and its chieftains, and repay 
The meed of gratitude to Zeus who willed 
And wrought the deed. So stands the tale fulfilled. 

LEADER Thy words o'erbear my doubt: for news of good, 
The ear of age hath ever youth enow: 
But those within and Clytemnestra's self 
Would fain hear all; glad thou their ears and mine.  (CLYTEMNESTRA
enters from the palace.)  

CLYTEMNESTRA That night, when first the fiery courier came,

In sign that Troy is ta'en and razed to earth, 
So wild a cry of joy my lips gave out, 
That I was chidden-Hath the beacon watch 
Made sure unto thy soul the sack of Troy? 
A very woman thou, whose heart leaps light 
At wandering rumours!-and with words like these 
They showed me how I strayed, misled of hope. 
Yet on each shrine I set the sacrifice, 
And, in the strain they held for feminine, 
Went heralds thro' the city, to and fro, 
With voice of loud proclaim, announcing joy; 
And in each fane they lit and quenched with wine 
The spicy perfumes fading in the flame. 
All is fulfilled: I spare your longer tale- 
The king himself anon shall tell me all. 

Remains to think what honour best may greet 
My lord, the majesty of Argos, home. 
What day beams fairer on a woman's eyes 
Than this, whereon she flings the portal wide, 
To hail her lord, heaven-shielded, home from war? 
This to my husband, that he tarry not, 
But turn the city's longing into joy! 
Yea, let him come, and coming may he find 
A wife no other than he left her, true 
And faithful as a watch-dog to his home, 
His foemen's foe, in all her duties leal, 
Trusty to keep for ten long years unmarred 
The store whereon he set his master-seal. 
Be steel deep-dyed, before ye look to see 
Ill joy, ill fame, from other wight, in me! 

HERALD 'Tis fairly said: thus speaks a noble dame, 
Nor speaks amiss, when truth informs the boast.  (CLYTEMNESTRA withdraws
again into the palace.)  

LEADER So has she spoken-be it yours to learn 
By clear interpreters her specious word. 
Turn to me, herald-tell me if anon 
The second well-loved lord of Argos comes? 
Hath Menelaus safely sped with you? 

HERALD Alas-brief boon unto my friends it were, 
To flatter them, for truth, with falsehoods fair! 

LEADER Speak joy, if truth be joy, but truth, at worst-

Too plainly, truth and joy are here divorced. 

HERALD The hero and his bark were rapt away 
Far from the Grecian fleet; 'tis truth I say. 

LEADER Whether in all men's sight from Ilion borne, 
Or from the fleet by stress of weather torn? 

HERALD Full on the mark thy shaft of speech doth light,

And one short word hath told long woes aright. 

LEADER But say, what now of him each comrade saith? 
What their forebodings, of his life or death? 

HERALD Ask me no more: the truth is known to none, 
Save the earth-fostering, all-surveying Sun. 

LEADER Say, by what doom the fleet of Greece was driven?

How rose, how sank the storm, the wrath of heaven? 

HERALD Nay, ill it were to mar with sorrow's tale 
The day of blissful news. The gods demand 
Thanksgiving sundered from solicitude. 
If one as herald came with rueful face 
To say, The curse has fallen, and the host 
Gone down to death; and one wide wound has reached 
The city's heart, and out of many homes 
Many are cast and consecrate to death, 
Beneath the double scourge, that Ares loves, 
The bloody pair, the fire and sword of doom- 
If such sore burden weighed upon my tongue, 
'Twere fit to speak such words as gladden fiends. 
But-coming as he comes who bringeth news 
Of safe return from toil, and issues fair, 
To men rejoicing in a weal restored- 
Dare I to dash good words with ill, and say 
For fire and sea, that erst held bitter feud, 
Now swore conspiracy and pledged their faith, 
Wasting the Argives worn with toil and war. 
Night and great horror of the rising wave 
Came o'er us, and the blasts that blow from Thrace 
Clashed ship with ship, and some with plunging prow 
Thro' scudding drifts of spray and raving storm 
Vanished, as strays by some ill shepherd driven. 
And when at length the sun rose bright, we saw 
Th' Aegaean sea-field flecked with flowers of death, 
Corpses of Grecian men and shattered hulls. 
For us indeed, some god, as well I deem, 
No human power, laid hand upon our helm, 
Snatched us or prayed us from the powers of air, 
And brought our bark thro'all, unharmed in hull: 
And saving Fortune sat and steered us fair, 
So that no surge should gulf us deep in brine, 
Nor grind our keel upon a rocky shore. 

So 'scaped we death that lurks beneath the sea, 
But, under day's white light, mistrustful all 
Of fortune's smile, we sat and brooded deep, 
Shepherds forlorn of thoughts that wandered wild 
O'er this new woe; for smitten was our host, 
And lost as ashes scattered from the pyre. 
Of whom if any draw his life-breath yet, 
Be well assured, he deems of us as dead, 
As we of him no other fate forebode. 
But heaven save all! If Menelaus live, 
He will not tarry, but will surely come: 
Therefore if anywhere the high sun's ray 
Descries him upon earth, preserved by Zeus, 
Who wills not yet to wipe his race away, 
Hope still there is that homeward he may wend. 
Enough-thou hast the truth unto the end.  (The HERALD departs.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Say, from whose lips the presage fell? 
Who read the future all too well, 
And named her, in her natal hour, 
Helen, the bride with war for dower 
'Twas one of the Invisible, 
Guiding his tongue with prescient power. 
On fleet, and host, and citadel, 
War, sprung from her, and death did lour, 
When from the bride-bed's fine-spun veil 
She to the Zephyr spread her sail. 
Strong blew the breeze-the surge closed oer 
The cloven track of keel and oar, 
But while she fled, there drove along, 
Fast in her wake, a mighty throng- 
Athirst for blood, athirst for war, 
Forward in fell pursuit they sprung, 
Then leapt on Simois' bank ashore, 
The leafy coppices among- 
No rangers, they, of wood and field, 
But huntsmen of the sword and shield. 

(antistrophe 1)

Heaven's jealousy, that works its will, 
Sped thus on Troy its destined ill, 
Well named, at once, the Bride and Bane; 
And loud rang out the bridal strain; 
But they to whom that song befell 
Did turn anon to tears again; 
Zeus tarries, but avenges still 
The husband's wrong, the household's stain! 
He, the hearth's lord, brooks not to see 
Its outraged hospitality. 

Even now, and in far other tone, 
Troy chants her dirge of mighty moan, 
Woe upon Paris, woe and hate! 
Who wooed his country's doom for mate- 
This is the burthen of the groan, 
Wherewith she wails disconsolate 
The blood, so many of her own 
Have poured in vain, to fend her fate; 
Troy! thou hast fed and freed to roam 
A lion-cub within thy home! 

(strophe 2)

A suckling creature, newly ta'en 
From mother's teat, still fully fain 
Of nursing care; and oft caressed, 
Within the arms, upon the breast, 
Even as an infant, has it lain; 
Or fawns and licks, by hunger pressed, 
The hand that will assuage its pain; 
In life's young dawn, a well-loved guest, 
A fondling for the children's play, 
A joy unto the old and grey. 

(antistrophe 2)

But waxing time and growth betrays 
The blood-thirst of the lion-race, 
And, for the house's fostering care, 
Unbidden all, it revels there, 
And bloody recompense repays- 
Rent flesh of kine, its talons tare: 
A mighty beast, that slays, and slays, 
And mars with blood the household fair, 
A God-sent pest invincible, 
A minister of fate and hell. 

(strophe 3)

Even so to Ilion's city came by stealth 
A spirit as of windless seas and skies, 
A gentle phantom-form of joy and wealth, 
With love's soft arrows speeding from its eyes- 
Love's rose, whose thorn doth pierce the soul in subtle wise.

Ah, well-a-day! the bitter bridal-bed, 
When the fair mischief lay by Paris' side! 
What curse on palace and on people sped 
With her, the Fury sent on Priam's pride, 
By angered Zeus! what tears of many a widowed bride! 

(antistrophe 3)

Long, long ago to mortals this was told, 
How sweet security and blissful state 
Have curses for their children-so men hold- 
And for the man of all-too prosperous fate 
Springs from a bitter seed some woe insatiate. 

Alone, alone, I deem far otherwise; 
Not bliss nor wealth it is, but impious deed, 
From which that after-growth of ill doth rise! 
Woe springs from wrong, the plant is like the seed- 
While Right, in honour's house, doth its own likeness breed.

(strophe 4)

Some past impiety, some grey old crime, 
Breeds the young curse, that wantons in our ill, 
Early or late, when haps th'appointed time- 
And out of light brings power of darkness still, 
A master-fiend, a foe, unseen, invincible; 

A pride accursed, that broods upon the race 
And home in which dark Ate holds her sway- 
Sin's child and Woe's, that wears its parents' face; 

(antistrophe 4)

While Right in smoky cribs shines clear as day, 
And decks with weal his life, who walks the righteous way.

From gilded halls, that hands polluted raise, 
Right turns away with proud averted eyes, 
And of the wealth, men stamp amiss with praise, 
Heedless, to poorer, holier temples hies, 
And to Fate's goal guides all, in its appointed wise.  (AGAMEMNON
enters, riding in a chariot and accompanied by a great procession.
CASSANDRA follows in another chariot. The CHORUS sings its welcome.)
Hail to thee, chief of Atreus' race, 
Returning proud from Troy subdued! 
How shall I greet thy conquering face? 
How nor a fulsome praise obtrude, 
Nor stint the meed of gratitude? 
For mortal men who fall to ill 
Take little heed of open truth, 
But seek unto its semblance still: 
The show of weeping and of ruth 
To the forlorn will all men pay, 
But, of the grief their eyes display, 
Nought to the heart doth pierce its way. 
And, with the joyous, they beguile 
Their lips unto a feigned smile, 
And force a joy, unfelt the while; 
But he who as a shepherd wise 
Doth know his flock, can ne'er misread 
Truth in the falsehood of his eyes, 
Who veils beneath a kindly guise 
A lukewarm love in deed. 
And thou, our leader-when of yore 
Thou badest Greece go forth to war 
For Helen's sake-I dare avow 
That then I held thee not as now; 
That to my vision thou didst seem 
Dyed in the hues of disesteem. 
I held thee for a pilot ill, 
And reckless, of thy proper will, 
Endowing others doomed to die 
With vain and forced audacity! 
Now from my heart, ungrudgingly, 
To those that wrought, this word be said- 
Well fall the labour ye have sped- 
Let time and search, O king, declare 
What men within thy city's bound 
Were loyal to the kingdom's care, 
And who were faithless found. 

AGAMEMNON  (still standing in the chariot) First, as is meet, a king's
All-hail be said 
To Argos, and the gods that guard the land- 
Gods who with me availed to speed us home, 
With me availed to wring from Priam's town 
The due of justice. In the court of heaven 
The gods in conclave sat and judged the cause, 
Not from a pleader's tongue, and at the close, 
Unanimous into the urn of doom 
This sentence gave, On Ilion and her men, 
Death: and where hope drew nigh to pardon's urn 
No hand there was to cast a vote therein. 
And still the smoke of fallen Ilion 
Rises in sight of all men, and the flame 
Of Ate's hecatomb is living yet, 
And where the towers in dusty ashes sink, 
Rise the rich fumes of pomp and wealth consumed 
For this must all men pay unto the gods 
The meed of mindful hearts and gratitude: 
For by our hands the meshes of revenge 
Closed on the prey, and for one woman's sake 
Troy trodden by the Argive monster lies- 
The foal, the shielded band that leapt the wall, 
What time with autumn sank the Pleiades. 
Yea, o'er the fencing wall a lion sprang 
Ravening, and lapped his fill of blood of kings. 

Such prelude spoken to the gods in full, 
To you I turn, and to the hidden thing 
Whereof ye spake but now: and in that thought 
I am as you, and what ye say, say I. 
For few are they who have such inborn grace, 
As to look up with love, and envy not, 
When stands another on the height of weal. 
Deep in his heart, whom jealousy hath seized, 
Her poison lurking doth enhance his load; 
For now beneath his proper woes he chafes, 
And sighs withal to see another's weal. 

I speak not idly, but from knowledge sure- 
There be who vaunt an utter loyalty, 
That is but as the ghost of friendship dead, 
A shadow in a glass, of faith gone by. 
One only-he who went reluctant forth 
Across the seas with me-Odysseus-he 
Was loyal unto me with strength and will, 
A trusty trace-horse bound unto my car. 
Thus-be he yet beneath the light of day, 
Or dead, as well I fear-I speak his praise. 
Lastly, whate'er be due to men or gods, 

With joint debate, in public council held, 
We will decide, and warily contrive 
That all which now is well may so abide: 
For that which haply needs the healer's art, 
That will we medicine, discerning well 
If cautery or knife befit the time. 

Now, to my palace and the shrines of home, 
I will pass in, and greet you first and fair, 
Ye gods, who bade me forth, and home again- 
And long may Victory tarry in my train!  (CLYTEMNESTRA enters from
the palace, followed by maidens bearing crimson robes.)  

CLYTEMNESTRA Old men of Argos, lieges of our realm, 
Shame shall not bid me shrink lest ye should see 
The love I bear my lord. Such blushing fear 
Dies at the last from hearts of human kind. 
From mine own soul and from no alien lips, 
I know and will reveal the life I bore. 
Reluctant, through the lingering livelong years, 
The while my lord beleaguered Ilion's wall. 

First, that a wife sat sundered from her lord, 
In widowed solitude, was utter woe 
And woe, to hear how rumour's many tongues 
All boded evil-woe, when he who came 
And he who followed spake of ill on ill, 
Keening Lost, lost, all lost! thro' hall and bower. 
Had this my husband met so many wounds, 
As by a thousand channels rumour told, 
No network e'er was full of holes as he. 
Had he been slain, as oft as tidings came 
That he was dead, he well might boast him now 
A second Geryon of triple frame, 
With triple robe of earth above him laid- 
For that below, no matter-triply dead, 
Dead by one death for every form he bore. 
And thus distraught by news of wrath and woe, 
Oft for self-slaughter had I slung the noose, 
But others wrenched it from my neck away. 
Hence haps it that Orestes, thine and mine, 
The pledge and symbol of our wedded troth, 
Stands not beside us now, as he should stand. 
Nor marvel thou at this: he dwells with one 
Who guards him loyally; 'tis Phocis' king, 
Strophius, who warned me erst, Bethink thee, queen, 
What woes of doubtful issue well may fall 
Thy lord in daily jeopardy at Troy, 
While here a populace uncurbed may cry, 
"Down witk the council, down!" bethink thee too, 
'Tis the world's way to set a harder heel 
On fallen power. 

For thy child's absence then 
Such mine excuse, no wily afterthought. 
For me, long since the gushing fount of tears 
Is wept away; no drop is left to shed. 
Dim are the eyes that ever watched till dawn, 
Weeping, the bale-fires, piled for thy return, 
Night after night unkindled. If I slept, 
Each sound-the tiny humming of a gnat, 
Roused me again, again, from fitful dreams 
Wherein I felt thee smitten, saw thee slain, 
Thrice for each moment of mine hour of sleep. 

All this I bore, and now, released from woe, 
I hail my lord as watch-dog of a fold, 
As saving stay-rope of a storm-tossed ship, 
As column stout that holds the roof aloft, 
As only child unto a sire bereaved, 
As land beheld, past hope, by crews forlorn, 
As sunshine fair when tempest's wrath is past, 
As gushing spring to thirsty wayfarer. 
So sweet it is to 'scape the press of pain. 
With such salute I bid my husband hail 
Nor heaven be wroth therewith! for long and hard 
I bore that ire of old. 

Sweet lord, step forth, 
Step from thy car, I pray-nay, not on earth 
Plant the proud foot, O king, that trod down Troy! 
Women! why tarry ye, whose task it is 
To spread your monarch's path with tapestry? 
Swift, swift, with purple strew his passage fair, 
That justice lead him to a home, at last, 
He scarcely looked to see.  (The attendant women spread the tapestry.)
For what remains, 
Zeal unsubdued by sleep shall nerve my hand 
To work as right and as the gods command. 

AGAMEMNON  (still in the chariot) Daughter of Leda, watcher o'er
my home, 
Thy greeting well befits mine absence long, 
For late and hardly has it reached its end. 
Know, that the praise which honour bids us crave, 
Must come from others' lips, not from our own: 
See too that not in fashion feminine 
Thou make a warrior's pathway delicate; 
Not unto me, as to some Eastern lord, 
Bowing thyself to earth, make homage loud. 
Strew not this purple that shall make each step 
An arrogance; such pomp beseems the gods, 
Not me. A mortal man to set his foot 
On these rich dyes? I hold such pride in fear, 
And bid thee honour me as man, not god. 
Fear not-such footcloths and all gauds apart, 
Loud from the trump of Fame my name is blown; 
Best gift of heaven it is, in glory's hour, 
To think thereon with soberness: and thou- 
Bethink thee of the adage, Call none blest 
Till peaceful death have crowned a life of weal. 
'Tis said: I fain would fare unvexed by fear. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Nay, but unsay it-thwart not thou my will!

AGAMEMNON Know, I have said, and will not mar my word. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Was it fear made this meekness to the gods?

AGAMEMNON If cause be cause, 'tis mine for this resolve.

CLYTEMNESTRA What, think'st thou, in thy place had Priam done?

AGAMEMNON He surely would have walked on broidered robes.

CLYTEMNESTRA Then fear not thou the voice of human blame.

AGAMEMNON Yet mighty is the murmur of a crowd. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Shrink not from envy, appanage of bliss. 

AGAMEMNON War is not woman's part, nor war of words. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Yet happy victors well may yield therein. 

AGAMEMNON Dost crave for triumph in this petty strife? 

CLYTEMNESTRA Yield; of thy grace permit me to prevail! 

AGAMEMNON Then, if thou wilt, let some one stoop to loose

Swiftly these sandals, slaves beneath my foot; 
And stepping thus upon the sea's rich dye, 
I pray, Let none among the gods look down 
With jealous eye on me-reluctant all, 
To trample thus and mar a thing of price, 
Wasting the wealth of garments silver-worth. 
Enough hereof: and, for the stranger maid, 
Lead her within, but gently: God on high 
Looks graciously on him whom triumph's hour 
Has made not pitiless. None willingly 
Wear the slave's yoke-and she, the prize and flower 
Of all we won, comes hither in my train, 
Gift of the army to its chief and lord. 
-Now, since in this my will bows down to thine, 
I will pass in on purples to my home.  (He descends from the chariot,
and moves towards the palace.)  

CLYTEMNESTRA A Sea there is-and who shall stay its springs?

And deep within its breast, a mighty store, 
Precious as silver, of the purple dye, 
Whereby the dipped robe doth its tint renew. 
Enough of such, O king, within thy halls 
There lies, a store that cannot fail; but I- 
I would have gladly vowed unto the gods 
Cost of a thousand garments trodden thus, 
(Had once the oracle such gift required) 
Contriving ransom for thy life preserved. 
For while the stock is firm the foliage climbs, 
Spreading a shade, what time the dog-star glows; 
And thou, returning to thine hearth and home, 
Art as a genial warmth in winter hours, 
Or as a coolness, when the lord of heaven 
Mellows the juice within the bitter grape. 
Such boons and more doth bring into a home 
The present footstep of its proper lord. 
Zeus, Zeus, Fulfilment's lord! my vows fulfil, 
And whatsoe'er it be, work forth thy will!  (She follows AGAMEMNON
into the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Wherefore for ever on the wings of fear 
Hovers a vision drear 
Before my boding heart? a strain, 
Unbidden and unwelcome, thrills mine ear, 
Oracular of pain. 
Not as of old upon my bosom's throne 
Sits Confidence, to spurn 
Such fears, like dreams we know not to discern. 
Old, old and grey long since the time has grown, 
Which saw the linked cables moor 
The fleet, when erst it came to Ilion's sandy shore; 

(antistrophe 1)

And now mine eyes and not another's see 
Their safe return. 

Yet none the less in me 
The inner spirit sings a boding song, 
Self-prompted, sings the Furies' strain- 
And seeks, and seeks in vain, 
To hope and to be strong! 

Ah! to some end of Fate, unseen, unguessed, 
Are these wild throbbings of my heart and breast- 
Yea, of some doom they tell- 
Each pulse, a knell. 
Lief, lief I were, that all 
To unfulfilment's hidden realm might fall. 

(strophe 2)

Too far, too far our mortal spirits strive, 
Grasping at utter weal, unsatisfied- 
Till the fell curse, that dwelleth hard beside, 
Thrust down the sundering wall. Too fair they blow, 
The gales that waft our bark on Fortune's tide! 
Swiftly we sail, the sooner an to drive 
Upon the hidden rock, the reef of woe. 
Then if the hand of caution warily 
Sling forth into the sea 
Part of the freight, lest all should sink below, 
From the deep death it saves the bark: even so, 
Doom-laden though it be, once more may rise 
His household, who is timely wise. 

How oft the famine-stricken field 
Is saved by God's large gift, the new year's yield! 

(antistrophe 2)

But blood of man once spilled, 
Once at his feet shed forth, and darkening the plain,- 
Nor chant nor charm can call it back again. 
So Zeus hath willed: 

Else had he spared the leech Asclepius, skilled 
To bring man from the dead: the hand divine 
Did smite himself with death-a warning and a sign- 

Ah me! if Fate, ordained of old, 
Held not the will of gods constrained, controlled, 
Helpless to us-ward, and apart- 
Swifter than speech my heart 
Had poured its presage out! 
Now, fretting, chafing in the dark of doubt, 
'Tis hopeless to unfold 
Truth, from fear's tangled skein; and, yearning to proclaim

Its thought, my soul is prophecy and flame.  (CLYTEMNESTRA comes out
of the palace and addresses CASSANDRA, who has remained motionless
in her chariot.)  

CLYTEMNESTRA Get thee within thou too, Cassandra, go! 
For Zeus to thee in gracious mercy grants 
To share the sprinklings of the lustral bowl, 
Beside the altar of his guardianship, 
Slave among many slaves. What, haughty still? 
Step from the car; Alcmena's son, 'tis said, 
Was sold perforce and bore the yoke of old. 
Ay, hard it is, but, if such fate befall, 
'Tis a fair chance to serve within a home 
Of ancient wealth and power. An upstart lord, 
To whom wealth's harvest came beyond his hope, 
Is as a lion to his slaves, in all 
Exceeding fierce, immoderate in sway. 
Pass in: thou hearest what our ways will be. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Clear unto thee, O maid, is her command,

But thou-within the toils of Fate thou art- 
If such thy will, I urge thee to obey; 
Yet I misdoubt thou dost nor hear nor heed. 

CLYTEMNESTRA I wot-unless like swallows she doth use 
Some strange barbarian tongue from oversea- 
My words must speak persuasion to her soul. 

LEADER Obey: there is no gentler way than this. 
Step from the car's high seat and follow her. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Truce to this bootless waiting here without!

I will not stay: beside the central shrine 
The victims stand, prepared for knife and fire- 
Offerings from hearts beyond all hope made glad. 
Thou-if thou reckest aught of my command, 
'Twere well done soon: but if thy sense be shut 
From these my words, let thy barbarian hand 
Fulfil by gesture the default of speech. 

LEADER No native is she, thus to read thy words 
Unaided: like some wild thing of the wood, 
New-trapped, behold! she shrinks and glares on thee. 

CLYTEMNESTRA 'Tis madness and the rule of mind distraught,

Since she beheld her city sink in fire, 
And hither comes, nor brooks the bit, until 
In foam and blood her wrath be champed away. 
See ye to her; unqueenly 'tis for me, 
Unheeded thus to cast away my words.  (CLYTEMNESTRA enters the palace.)

LEADER But with me pity sits in anger's place. 
Poor maiden, come thou from the car; no way 
There is but this-take up thy servitude. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Woe, woe, alas! Earth, Mother Earth! and thou

Apollo, Apollo! 

LEADER Peace! shriek not to the bright prophetic god, 
Who will not brook the suppliance of woe. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Woe, woe, alas! Earth, Mother Earth! and thou

Apollo, Apollo! 

LEADER Hark, with wild curse she calls anew on him, 
Who stands far off and loathes the voice of wail. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Apollo, Apollo! 
God of all ways, but only Death's to me, 
Once and again, O thou, Destroyer named, 
Thou hast destroyed me, thou, my love of old! 

LEADER She grows presageful of her woes to come, 
Slave tho' she be, instinct with prophecy. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Apollo, Apollo! 
God of all ways, but only Death's to me, 
O thou Apollo, thou Destroyer named! 
What way hast led me, to what evil home? 

LEADER Know'st thou it not? The home of Atreus' race: 
Take these my words for sooth and ask no more. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Home cursed of God! Bear witness unto me,

Ye visioned woes within- 
The blood-stained hands of them that smite their kin- 
The strangling noose, and, spattered o'er 
With human blood, the reeking floor! 

LEADER How like a sleuth-hound questing on the track, 
Keen-scented unto blood and death she hies! 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Ah! can the ghostly guidance fail,

Whereby my prophet-soul is onwards led? 
Look! for their flesh the spectre-children wail, 
Their sodden limbs on which their father fed! 

LEADER Long since we knew of thy prophetic fame,- 
But for those deeds we seek no prophet's tongue- 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) God! 'tis another crime- 
Worse than the storied woe of olden time, 
Cureless, abhorred, that one is plotting here- 
A shaming death, for those that should be dear 
Alas! and far away, in foreign land, 
He that should help doth stand! 

LEADER I knew th' old tales, the city rings withal- 
But now thy speech is dark, beyond my ken. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) O wretch, O purpose fell! 
Thou for thy wedded lord 
The cleansing wave hast poured- 
A treacherous welcome 
How the sequel tell? 
Too soon 'twill come, too soon, for now, even now, 
She smites him, blow on blow! 

LEADER Riddles bcyond my rede--I peer in vain 
Thro' the dim films that screen the prophecy 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) God! a new sight! a net, a snare of hell,

Set by her hand--herself a snare more fell 
A wedded wife, she slays her lord, 
Helped by another hand! 
Ye powers, whose hate 
Of Atreus' home no blood can satiate, 
Raise the wild cry above the sacrifice abhorred! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Why biddest thou some hend, I know not whom,

Shriek o'er the house? Thine is no cheering word. 
Back to my heart in frozen fear I feel 
My wanning life-blood run-- The blood that round the wounding steel

Ebbs slow, as sinks life's parting sun-- 
Swift, swift and sure, some woe comes pressing on. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Away, away--keep him away-- 
The monarch of the herd, the pasture's pride, 
Far from his mate! In treach'rous wrath, 
Muffling his swarthy horns, with secret scathe 
She gores his fenceless side! Hark ! in the brimming bath,

The heavy plash--the dying cry-- 
Hark--in the laver--hark, he falls by treachery! 

CHORUS  (chanting) I read amiss dark sayings such as thine,

Yet something warns me that they tell of ill, 
O dark prophetic speech, Ill tidings dost thou teach 
Ever, to mortals here below! Ever some tale of awe and woe

Thro' all thy windings manifold Do we unriddle and unfold!

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Ah well-a-day! the cup of agony, 
Whereof I chant, foams with a draught for me 
Ah lord, ah leader, thou hast led me here-- 
Was't but to die with thee whose doom is near? 

CHORUS  (chanting) Distraught thou art, divinely stirred,

And wailest for thyself a tuneless lay, 
As piteous as the ceaseless tale 
Wherewith the brown melodious bird 
Doth ever Itys! Itys! wail, 
Deep-bowered in sorrow, all its little life-time's day! 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Ah for thy fate, O shrill-voiced nightingale!

Some solace for thy woes did Heaven afford, 
Clothed thee with soft brown plumes, and life apart from wail--

But for my death is edged the double-biting sword! 

CHORUS  (chanting) What pangs are these, what fruitless pain,

Sent on thee from on high? 
Thou chantest terror's frantic strain, 
Yet in shrill measured melody. 
How thus unerring canst thou sweep along 
The prophet's path of boding song? 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Woe, Paris, woe on thee! thy bridal joy

Was death and fire upon thy race and Troy! 
And woe for thee, Scamander's flood! 
Beside thy banks, O river fair, 
I grew in tender nursing care 
From childhood unto maidenhood! 
Now not by thine, but by Cocytus' stream 
And Acheron's banks shall ring my boding scream. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Too plain is all, too plain! 
A child might read aright thy fateful strain. 
Deep in my heart their piercing fang 
Terror and sorrow set, the while I heard 
That piteous, low, tender word, 
Yet to mine ear and heart a crushing pang. 

CASSANDRA  (chanting) Woe for my city, woe for Ilion's fall!

Father, how oft with sanguine stain 
Streamed on thine altar-stone the blood of cattle, slain

That heaven might guard our wall! 
But all was shed in vain. 
Low lie the shattered towers whereas they fell, 
And I--ah burning heart!--shall soon lie low as well. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Of sorrow is thy song, of sorrow still!

Alas, what power of ill 
Sits heavy on thy heart and bids thee tell 
In tears of perfect moan thy deadly tale? 
Some woe--I know not what--must close thy pious wail. 

CASSANDRA  (more calmly) List! for no more the presage of my soul,

Bride-like, shall peer from its secluding veil; 
But as the morning wind blows clear the east, 
More bright shall blow the wind of prophecy, 
And as against the low bright line of dawn 
Heaves high and higher yet the rolling wave, 
So in the clearing skies of prescience 
Dawns on my soul a further, deadlier woe, 
And I will speak, but in dark speech no more. 
Bear witness, ye, and follow at my side-- 
I scent the trail of blood, shed long ago. 
Within this house a choir abidingly 
Chants in harsh unison the chant of ill; 
Yea, and they drink, for more enhardened joy, 
Man's blood for wine, and revel in the halls, 
Departing never, Furies of the home. 
They sit within, they chant the primal curse, 
Each spitting hatred on that crime of old, 
The brother's couch, the love incestuous 
That brought forth hatred to the ravisher. 
Say, is my speech or wild and erring now, 
Or doth its arrow cleave the mark indeed? 
They called me once, The prophetess of lies, 
The wandering hag, the pest of every door-- 
Attest ye now, She knows in very sooth 
The house's curse, the storied infamy. 

LEADER Yet how should oath--how loyally soe'er 
I swear it--aught avail thee? In good sooth, 
My wonder meets thy claim: I stand amazed 
That thou, a maiden born beyond the seas, 
Dost as a native know and tell aright 
Tales of a city of an alien tongue. 

CASSANDRA That is my power--a boon Apollo gave. 

LEADER God though he were, yearning for mortal maid? 

CASSANDRA Ay! what seemed shame of old is shame no more.

LEADER Such finer sense suits not with slavery. 

CASSANDRA He strove to win me, panting for my love. 

LEADER Came ye by compact unto bridal joys? 

CASSANDRA Nay--for I plighted troth, then foiled the god.

LEADER Wert thou already dowered with prescience? 

CASSANDRA Yea--prophetess to Troy of all her doom. 

LEADER How left thee then Apollo's wrath unscathed? 

CASSANDRA I, false to him, seemed prophet false to all.

LEADER Not so--to us at least thy words seem sooth. 

CASSANDRA Woe for me, woe! Again the agony-- 
Dread pain that sees the future all too well 
With ghastly preludes whirls and racks my soul. 
Behold ye--yonder on the palace roof 
The spectre-children sitting--look, such things 
As dreams are made on, phantoms as of babes, 
Horrible shadows, that a kinsman's hand 
Hath marked with murder, and their arms are full-- 
A rueful burden--see, they hold them up, 
The entrails upon which their father fed! 
For this, for this, I say there plots revenge 
A coward lion, couching in the lair-- 
Guarding the gate against my master's foot-- 
My master--mine--I bear the slave's yoke now, 
And he, the lord of ships, who trod down Troy, 
Knows not the fawning treachery of tongue 
Of this thing false and dog-like--how her speech 
Glozes and sleeks her purpose, till she win 
By ill fate's favour the desired chance, 
Moving like Ate to a secret end. 
O aweless soul! the woman slays her lord-- 
Woman? what loathsome monster of the earth 
Were fit comparison? The double snake-- 
Or Scylla, where she dwells, the seaman s bane, 
Girt round about with rocks? some hag of hell, 
Raving a truceless curse upon her kin? 
Hark even now she cries exultingly 
The vengeful cry that tells of battle turned-- 
How fain, forsooth, to greet her chief restored! 
Nay then, believe me not: what skills belief 
Or disbelief ? Fate works its will--and thou 
Wilt see and say in ruth, Her tale was true. 

LEADER Ah--'tis Thyestes' feast on kindred flesh-- 
I guess her meaning and with horror thrill, 
Hearing no shadow'd hint of th' o'er-true tale, 
But its full hatefulness: yet, for the rest, 
Far from the track I roam, and know no more. 

CASSANDRA 'Tis Agamemnon's doom thou shalt behold. 

LEADER Peace hapless woman, to thy boding words! 

CASSANDRA Far from my speech stands he who sains and saves.

LEADER Ay-- were such a doom at hand-- which God forbid!

CASSANDRA Thou prayest idly--these move swift to slay. 

LEADER What man prepares a deed of such despite? 

CASSANDRA Fool! thus to read amiss mine oracles. 

LEADER Deviser and device are dark to me. 

CASSANDRA Dark! all too well I speak the Grecian tongue.

LEADER Ay--but in thine, as in Apollo's strains, 
Familiar is the tongue, but dark the thought. 

CASSANDRA Ah, ah the fire! it waxes, nears me now-- 
Woe, woe for me, Apollo of the dawn! 
Lo, how the woman-thing, the lioness 
Couched with the wolf--her noble mate afar-- 
Will slay me, slave forlorn! Yea, like some witch, 
She drugs the cup of wrath, that slays her lord, 
With double death--his recompense for me! 
Ay, 'tis for me, the prey he bore from Troy, 
That she hath sworn his death, and edged the steel! 
Ye wands, ye wreaths that cling around my neck, 
Ye showed me prophetess yet scorned of all-- 
I stamp you into death, or e'er I die-- 
Down, to destruction! Thus I stand revenged-- 
Go, crown some other with a prophet's woe. 
Lookl it is he, it is Apollo's self 
Rending from me the prophet-robe he gave. 
God! while I wore it yet, thou saw'st me mocked 
There at my home by each malicious mouth-- 
To all and each, an undivided scorn. 
The name alike and fate of witch and cheat-- 
Woe, poverty, and famine--all I bore; 
And at this last the god hath brought me here 
Into death's toils, and what his love had made, 
His hate unmakes me now: and I shall stand 
Not now before the altar of my home, 
But me a slaughter-house and block of blood 
Shall see hewn down, a reeking sacrifice. 
Yet shall the gods have heed of me who die, 
For by their will shall one requite my doom. 
He, to avenge his father's blood outpoured, 
Shall smite and slay with matricidal hand. 
Ay, he shall come--tho' far away he roam, 
A banished wanderer in a stranger's land-- 
To crown his kindred's edifice of ill, 
Called home to vengeance by his father's fall: 
Thus have the high gods sworn, and shall fulfil. 
And now why mourn I, tarrying on earth, 
Since first mine Ilion has found its fate 
And I beheld, and those who won the wall 
Pass to such issue as the gods ordain? 
I too will pass and like them dare to die!  (She turns and looks upon
the palace door.)  Portal of Hades, thus I bid thee hail!

Grant me one boon--a swift and mortal stroke, 
That all unwrung by pain, with ebbing blood 
Shed forth in quiet death, I close mine eyes. 

LEADER Maid of mysterious woes, mysterious lore, 
Long was thy prophecy: but if aright 
Thou readest all thy fate, how, thus unscared, 
Dost thou approach the altar of thy doom, 
As fronts the knife some victim, heaven controlled? 

CASSANDRA Friends, there is no avoidance in delay. 

LEADER Yet who delays the longest, his the gain. 

CASSANDRA The day is come--flight were small gain to me!

LEADER O brave endurance of a soul resolved! 

CASSANDRA That were ill praise, for those of happier doom.

LEADER All fame is happy, even famous death. 

CASSANDRA Ah sire, ah brethren, famous once were ye!  (She moves
to enter the house, then starts back.)  

LEADER What fear is this that scares thee from the house?

CASSANDRA Pah! 

LEADER What is this cry? some dark despair of soul? 

CASSANDRA Pah! the house fumes with stench and spilth of blood.

LEADER How? 'tis the smell of household offerings. 

CASSANDRA 'Tis rank as charnel-scent from open graves. 

LEADER Thou canst not mean this scented Syrian nard? 

CASSANDRA Nay, let me pass within to cry aloud 
The monarch's fate and mine-- enough of life. 
Ah friends! 
Bear to me witness, since I fall in death, 
That not as birds that shun the bush and scream 
I moan in idle terror. This attest 
When for my death's revenge another dies, 
A woman for a woman, and a man 
Falls, for a man ill-wedded to his curse. 
Grant me this boon--the last before I die. 

LEADER Brave to the last! I mourn thy doom foreseen. 

CASSANDRA Once more one utterance, but not of wail, 
Though for my death--and then I speak no more. 
Sun! thou whose beam I shall not see again, 
To thee I cry, Let those whom vengeance calls 
To slay their kindred's slayers, quit withal 
The death of me, the slave, the fenceless prey. 
Ah state of mortal man! in time of weal, 
A line, a shadow! and if ill fate fall, 
One wet sponge-sweep wipes all our trace away-- 
And this I deem less piteous, of the twain.  (She enters the palace.)

CHORUS  (singing) Too true it is! our mortal state 
With bliss is never satiate, 
And none, before the palace high 
And stately of prosperity, 
Cries to us with a voice of fear, 
Away! 'tis ill to enter here! 
Lo! this our lord hath trodden down, 
By grace of heaven, old Priam's town, 
And praised as god he stands once more 
On Argos' shore! 
Yet now--if blood shed long ago 
Cries out that other blood shall flow-- 
His life-blood, his, to pay again 
The stern requital of the slain-- 
Peace to that braggart's vaunting vain, 
Who, having heard the chieftain's tale, 
Yet boasts of bliss untouched by bale!  (A loud cry is heard from
within.)  

VOICE OF AGAMEMNON O I am sped--a deep, a mortal blow. 

LEADER Listen, listen! who is screaming as in mortal agony?

VOICE OF AGAMEMNON O! O! again, another, another blow! 

LEADER The bloody act is over--I have heard the monarch's cry--

Let us swiftly take some counsel, lest we too be doomed to die.

ONE OF THE CHORUS 'Tis best, I judge, aloud for aid to call,

"Ho! loyal Argives! to the palace, all!" 

ANOTHER Better, I deem, ourselves to bear the aid, 
And drag the deed to light, while drips the blade. 

ANOTHER Such will is mine, and what thou say'st I say: 
Swiftly to act! the time brooks no delay. 

ANOTHER Ay, for tis plain, this prelude of their song 
Foretells its close in tyranny and wrong. 

ANOTHER Behold, we tarry--but thy name, Delay, 
They spurn, and press with sleepless hand to slay. 

ANOTHER I know not what 'twere well to counsel now-- 
Who wills to act, 'tis his to counsel how. 

ANOTHER Thy doubt is mine: for when a man is slain, 
I have no words to bring his life again. 

ANOTHER What? e'en for life's sake, bow us to obey 
These house-defilers and their tyrant sway ? 

ANOTHER Unmanly doom! 'twere better far to die-- 
Death is a gentler lord than tyranny. 

ANOTHER Think well--must cry or sign of woe or pain 
Fix our conclusion that the chief is slain? 

ANOTHER Such talk befits us when the deed we see-- 
Conjecture dwells afar from certainty. 

LEADER I read one will from many a diverse word, 
To know aright, how stands it with our lord!  (The central doors of
the palace open, disclosing CLYTEMNESTRA, who comes forward. She has
blood smeared upon her forehead. The body of AGAMEMNON lies, muffled
in a long robe, within a silver-sided laver; the corpse of CASSANDRA
is laid beside him.)  

CLYTEMNESTRA Ho, ye who heard me speak so long and oft 
The glozing word that led me to my will-- 
Hear how I shrink not to unsay it all! 
How else should one who willeth to requite 
Evil for evil to an enemy 
Disguised as friend, weave the mesh straitly round him, 
Not to be overleaped, a net of doom? 
This is the sum and issue of old strife, 
Of me deep-pondered and at length fulfilled. 
All is avowed, and as I smote I stand 
With foot set firm upon a finished thing! 
I turn not to denial: thus I wrought 
So that he could nor flee nor ward his doom. 
Even as the trammel hems the scaly shoal, 
I trapped him with inextricable toils, 
The ill abundance of a baffling robe; 
Then smote him, once, again--and at each wound 
He cried aloud, then as in death relaxed 
Each limb and sank to earth; and as he lay, 
Once more I smote him, with the last third blow, 
Sacred to Hades, saviour of the dead. 
And thus he fell, and as he passed away, 
Spirit with body chafed; each dying breath 
Flung from his breast swift bubbling jets of gore, 
And the dark sprinklings of the rain of blood 
Fell upon me; and I was fain to feel 
That dew-- not sweeter is the rain of heaven 
To cornland, when the green sheath teems with grain. 
Elders of Argos--since the thing stands so, 
I bid you to rejoice, if such your will: 
Rejoice or not, I vaunt and praise the deed, 
And well I ween, if seemly it could be, 
'Twere not ill done to pour libations here, 
Justly-- ay, more than justly-- on his corpse 
Who filled his home with curses as with wine, 
And thus returned to drain the cup he filled. 

LEADER I marvel at thy tongue's audacity, 
To vaunt thus loudly o'er a husband slain. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Ye hold me as a woman, weak of will, 
And strive to sway me: but my heart is stout, 
Nor fears to speak its uttermost to you, 
Albeit ye know its message. Praise or blame, 
Even as ye list,-- I reck not of your words. 
Lo! at my feet lies Agamemnon slain, 
My husband once-- and him this hand of mine, 
A right contriver, fashioned for his death. 
Behold the deed! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Woman, what deadly birth, 
What venomed essence of the earth 
Or dark distilment of the wave, 
To thee such passion gave, 
Nerving thine hand 
To set upon thy brow this burning crown, 
The curses of thy land? 
Our king by thee cut off, hewn down! 
Go forth-- they cry-- accurscd and forlorn, 
To hate and scorn! 

CLYTEMNESTRA O ye just men, who speak my sentence now, 
The city's hate, the ban of all my realm! 
Ye had no voice of old to launch such doom 
On him, my husband, when he held as light 
My daughter's life as that of sheep or goat, 
One victim from the thronging fleecy fold! 
Yea, slew in sacrifice his child and mine, 
The well-loved issue of my travail-pangs, 
To lull and lay the gales that blew from Thrace. 
That deed of his, I say, that stain and shame, 
Had rightly been atoned by banishment; 
But ye. who then were dumb, are stern to judge 
This deed of mine that doth afront your ears. 
Storm out your threats, yet knowing this for sooth, 
That I am ready, if your hand prevail 
As mine now doth, to bow beneath your sway: 
If God say nay, it shall be yours to learn 
By chastisement a late humility. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Bold is thy craft, and proud 
Thy confidence, thy vaunting loud; 
Thy soul, that chose a murd'ress' fate, 
Is all with blood elate-- 
Maddened to know 
The blood not yet avenged, the damn'ed spot 
Crimson upon thy brow. 
But Fate prepares for thee thy lot-- 
Smitten as thou didst smite, without a friend, 
To meet thine end! 

CLYTEMNESTRA Hear then the sanction of the oath I swear--

By the great vengeance for my murdered child, 
By Ate, by the Fury unto whom 
This man lies sacrificed by hand of mine, 
I do not look to tread the hall of Fear, 
While in this hearth and home of mine there burns 
The light of love--Aegisthus--as of old 
Loyal, a stalwart shield of confidence-- 
As true to me as this slain man was false, 
Wronging his wife with paramours at Troy, 
Fresh from the kiss of each Chryseis there! 
Behold him dead-- behold his captive prize, 
Seeress and harlot-- comfort of his bed, 
True prophetess, true paramour-- I wot 
The sea-bench was not closer to the flesh, 
Full oft, of every rower, than was she. 
See, ill they did, and ill requites them now. 
His death ye know: she as a dying swan 
Sang her last dirge, and lies, as erst she lay, 
Close to his side, and to my couch has left 
A sweet new taste of joys that know no fear. 

(strophe 1)

CHORUS  (singing) Ah woe and well-a-day! I would that Fate--

Not bearing agony too great, 
Nor stretching me too long on couch of pain-- 
Would bid mine eyelids keep 
The morningless and unawakening sleep! 
For life is weary, now my lord is slain, 
The gracious among kings! 
Hard fate of old he bore and many grievous things, 
And for a woman's sake, on Ilian land-- 
Now is his life hewn down, and by a woman's hand. 
O Helen, O infatuate soul, 
Who bad'st the tides of battle roll, 
O'erwhelming thousands, life on life, 
'Neath Ilion's wall! 
And now lies dead the lord of all. 
The blossom of thy storied sin 
Bears blood's inexpiable stain, 
O thou that erst, these halls within, 
Wert unto all a rock of strife, 
A husband's bane! 

CLYTEMNESTRA  (chanting) Peace! pray not thou for death as though

Thine heart was whelmed beneath this woe, 
Nor turn thy wrath aside to ban 
The name of Helen, nor recall 
How she, one bane of many a man, 
Sent down to death the Danaan lords, 
To sleep at Troy the sleep of swords, 
And wrought the woe that shattered all. 

(antistrophe 1)

CHORUS Fiend of the race! that swoopest fell 
Upon the double stock of Tantalus, 
Lording it o'er me by a woman's will, 
Stern, manful, and imperious-- 
A bitter sway to me! 
Thy very form I see, 
Like some grim raven, perched upon thc slain, 
Exulting o'er the crime, aloud, in tuneless strain! 

CLYTEMNESTRA  (chanting) Right was that word--thou namest well

The brooding race-fiend, triply fell! 
From him it is that murder's thirst, 
Blood-lapping, inwardly is nursed-- 
Ere time the ancient scar can sain, 
New blood comes welling forth again. 

(strophe 2)

CHORUS Grim is his wrath and heavy on our home, 
That fiend of whom thv voice has cried, 
Alas, an omened cry of woe unsatisfied, 
An all-devouring doom! 
Ah woe, ah Zeus! from Zeus all things befall-- 
Zeus the high cause and finisher of all!-- 
Lord of our mortal state, by him are willed 
All things, by him fulfilled! 

(refrain 1)

Yet ah my king, my king no more! 
What words to say, what tears to pour 
Can tell my love for thee? 
The spider-web of treachery 
She wove and wound, thy life around, 
And lo! I see thee lie, 
And thro' a coward, impious wound 
Pant forth thv life and die! 
A death of shame--ah woe on woe! 
A treach'rous hand, a cleaving blow! 

CLYTEMNESTRA  (chanting) My guilt thou harpest, o'er and o'er!

I bid thee reckon me no more 
As Agamemnon's spouse. 
The old Avenger, stern of mood 
For Atreus and his feast of blood, 
Hath struck the lord of Atreus' house, 
And in the semblance of his wife 
The king hath slain.-- 
Yea, for the murdered children's life, 
A chieftain's in requital ta'en. 

(antistrophe 2)

CHORUS Thou guiltless of this murder, thou! 
Who dares such thought avow? 
Yet it may be, wroth for the parent's deed, 
The fiend hath holpen thee to slay the son. 
Dark Ares, god of death, is pressing on 
Thro' streams of blood by kindred shed, 
Exacting the accompt for children dead, 
For clotted blood, for flesh on which their sire did feed.

(refrain 2)

Yet ah my king, my king no more! 
What words to say, what tears to pour 
Can tell my love for thee? 
The spider-web of treachery 
She wove and wound, thy life around, 
And lo! I see thee lie, 
And thro' a coward, impious wound 
Pant forth thy life and die! 
A death of shame--ah woe on woe! 
A treach'rous hand, a cleaving blow! 

CLYTEMNESTRA  (chanting) I deem not that the death he died

Had overmuch of shame: 
For this was he who did provide 
Foul wrong unto his house and name: 
His daughter, blossom of my womb, 
He gave unto a deadly doom, 
Iphigenia, child of tears! 
And as he wrought, even so he fares. 
Nor be his vaunt too loud in hell; 
For by the sword his sin he wrought, 
And by the sword himself is brought 
Among the dead to dwell. 

(strophe 3)

CHORUS Ah whither shall I fly? 
For all in ruin sinks the kingly hall; 
Nor swift device nor shift of thought have I, 
To 'scape its fall. 
A little while the gentler rain-drops fail; 
I stand distraught--a ghastly interval, 
Till on the roof-tree rings the bursting hail 
Of blood and doom. Even now fate whets the steel 
On whetstone new and deadlier than of old, 
The steel that smites, in Justice' hold, 
Another death to deal. 
O Earth! that I had lain at rest 
And lapped for ever in thy breast, 
Ere I had seen my chieftain fall 
Within the laver's silver wall, 
Low-lying on dishonoured bier! 
And who shall give him sepulchre, 
And who the wail of sorrow pour? 
Woman, 'tis thine no more! 
A graceless gift unto his shade 
Such tribute, by his murd'ress paid! 
Strive not thus wrongly to atone 
The impious deed thy hand hath done. 
Ah, who above the god-like chief 
Shall weep the tears of loyal grief? 
Who speak above his lowly grave 
The last sad praises of the brave? 

CLYTEMNESTRA  (chanting) Peace! for such task is none of thine

By me he fell, by me he died, 
And now his burial rites be mine! 
Yet from these halls no mourners' train 
Shall celebrate his obsequies; 
Only by Acheron's rolling tide 
His child shall spring unto his side, 
And in a daughter's loving wise 
Shall clasp and kiss him once again! 

CHORUS Lo! sin by sin and sorrow dogg'd by sorrow-- 
And who the end can know? 
The slayer of to-day shall die to-morrow-- 
The wage of wrong is woe. 
While Time shall be, while Zeus in heaven is lord, 
His law is fixed and stern; 
On him that wrought shall vengeance be outpoured-- 
The tides of doom return. 
The children of the curse abide within 
These halls of high estate-- 
And none can wrench from off the home of sin 
The clinging grasp of fate. 

CLYTEMNESTRA  (chanting) Now walks thy word aright, to tell

This ancient truth of oracle; 
But I with vows of sooth will pray 
To him, the power that holdeth sway 
O'er all the race of Pleisthenes-- 
Tho' dark the deed and deep the guilt, 
With this last blood, my hands have split, 
I pray thee let thine anger cease! 
I pray thee pass from us away 
To some new race in other lands, 
There, if thou wilt, to wrong and slay 
The lives of men by kindred hands. 
For me 'tis all sufficient meed, 
Tho' little wealth or power were won, 
So I can say, 'Tis past and done. 
The bloody lust and murderous, 
The inborn frenzy of our house, 
Is ended, by my deed!  (AEGISTHUS and his armed attendants enter.)

AEGISTHUS Dawn of the day of rightful vengeance, hail! 
I dare at length aver that gods above 
Have care of men and heed of earthly wrongs. 
I, I who stand and thus exult to see 
This man lie wound in robes the Furies wove, 
Slain in the requital of his father's craft. 
Take ye the truth, that Atreus, this man's sire, 
The lord and monarch of this land of old, 
Held with my sire Thyestes deep dispute, 
Brother with brother, for the prize of sway, 
And drave him from his home to banishment. 
Thereafter, the lorn exile homeward stole 
And clung a suppliant to the hearth divine, 
And for himself won this immunity-- 
Not with his own blood to defile the land 
That gave him birth. But Atreus, godless sire 
Of him who here lies dead, this welcome planned-- 
With zeal that was not love he feigned to hold 
In loyal joy a day of festal cheer, 
And bade my father to his board, and set 
Before him flesh that was his children once. 
First, sitting at the upper board alone, 
He hid the fingers and the feet, but gave 
The rest--and readily Thyestes took 
What to his ignorance no semblance wore 
Of human flesh, and ate: behold what curse 
That eating brought upon our race and name! 
For when he knew what all unhallowed thing 
He thus had wrought, with horror's bitter cry 
Back-starting, spewing forth the fragments foul, 
On Pelops' house a deadly curse he spake-- 
As darkly as I spurn this damned food, 
So perish all the race of Pleisthenes! 
Thus by that curse fell he whom here ye see, 
And I--who else?--this murder wove and planned; 
For me, an infant yet in swaddling bands, 
Of the three children youngest, Atreus sent 
To banishment by my sad father's side: 
But Justice brought me home once more, grown now 
To manhood's years; and stranger tho' I was, 
My right hand reached unto the chieftain's life, 
Plotting and planning all that malice bade. 
And death itself were honour now to me, 
Beholding him in Justice' ambush ta'en. 

LEADER Aegisthus, for this insolence of thine 
That vaunts itself in evil, take my scorn. 
Of thine own will, thou sayest, thou hast slain 
The chieftain, by thine own unaided plot 
Devised the piteous death: I rede thee well, 
Think not thy head shall 'scape, when right prevails, 
The people's ban, the stones of death and doom. 

AEGISTHUS This word frcm thee, this word from one who rows

Low at the oars beneath, what time we rule, 
We of the upper tier ? Thou'lt know anon, 
'Tis bitter to be taught again in age, 
By one so young, submission at the word. 
But iron of the chain and hunger's throes 
Can minister unto an o'erswoln pride 
Marvellous well, ay, even in the old. 
Hast eyes and seest not this? Peace-- kick not thus 
Against the pricks, unto thy proper pain! 

LEADER Thou womanish man, waiting till war did cease, 
Home-watcher and defiler of the couch, 
And arch-deviser of the chieftain's doom! 

AEGISTHUS Bold words again! but they shall end in tears.

'The very converse, thine, of Orpheus' tongue: 
He roused and led in ecstasy of joy 
All things that heard his voice melodious; 
But thou as with the futile cry of curs 
Wilt draw men wrathfully upon thee. Peace! 
Or strong subjection soon shall tame thy tongue. 

LEADER Ay, thou art one to hold an Argive down-- 
Thou, skilled to plan the murder of the king, 
But not with thine own hand to smite the blow! 

AEGISTHUS That fraudful force was woman's very part, 
Not mine, whom deep suspicion from of old 
Would have debarred. Now by his treasure's aid 
My purpose holds to rule the citizens. 
But whoso will not bear mv guiding hand, 
Him for his corn-fed mettle I will drive 
Not as a trace-horse, light-caparisoned, 
But to the shafts with heaviest harness bound. 
Famine, the grim mate of the dungeon dark, 
Shall look on him and shall behold him tame. 

LEADER Thou losel soul, was then thy strength too slight

To deal in murder, while a woman's hand, 
Staining and shaming Argos and its gods, 
Availed to slay him? Ho, if anywhere 
The light of life smite on Orestes' eyes, 
Let him, returning by some guardian fate, 
Hew down with force her paramour and her! 

AEGISTHUS How thy word and act shall issue, thou shalt shortly understand.

LEADER Up to action, O my comrades! for the fight is hard at hand.

Swift, your right hands to the sword hilt! bare the weapon as for
strife-- 

AEGISTHUS Lo! I too am standing ready, hand on hilt for death or
life. 

LEADER 'Twas thy word and we accept it: onward to the chance of war!

CLYTEMNESTRA Nay, enough, enough, my champion! we will smite and
slay no more. 
Already have we reaped enough the harvest-field of guilt:

Enough of wrong and murder, let no other blood be spilt.

Peace, old men! and pass away unto the homes by Fate decreed,

Lest ill valour meet our vengeance--'twas a necessary deed.

But enough of toils and troubles--be the end, if ever, now,

Ere thy talon, O Avenger, deal another deadly blow. 
'Tis a woman's word of warning, and let who will list thereto.

AEGISTHUS But that these should loose and lavish reckless blossoms
of the tongue, 
And in hazard of their fortune cast upon me words of wrong,

And forget the law of subjects, and revile their ruler's word--

LEADER Ruler? but 'tis not for Argives, thus to own a dastard lord!

AEGISTHUS I will follow to chastise thee in my coming days of sway.

LEADER Not if Fortune guide Orestes safely on his homeward way.

AEGISTHUS Ah, well I know how exiles feed on hopes of their return.

LEADER Fare and batten on pollution of the right, while 'tis thy
turn. 

AEGISTHUS Thou shalt pay, be w ell assured, heavy quittance for thy
pride. 

LEADER Crow and strut, with her to watch thee, like a cock, his mate
beside! 

CLYTEMNESTRA Heed not thou too highly of them--let the cur-pack growl
and yell: 
I and thou will rule the palace and will order all things well.  (AEGISTHUS
and CLYTEMNESTRA move towards the palace, as the CHORUS sullenly withdraws.)

 THEEND

 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

By the tomb of Agamemnon near the palace in Argos. ORESTES and PYLADES
enter, dressed as travellers. ORESTES carries two locks of hair in
his hand.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

ORESTES Lord of the shades and patron of the realm 
That erst my father swayed, list now my prayer, 
Hermes, and save me with thine aiding arm, 
Me who from banishment returning stand 
On this my country; lo, my foot is set 
On this grave-mound, and herald-like, as thou, 
Once and again, I bid my father hear. 
And these twin locks, from mine head shorn, I bring, 
And one to Inachus the river-god, 
My young life's nurturer, I dedicate, 
And one in sign of mourning unfulfilled 
I lay, though late, on this my father's grave. 
For O my father, not beside thy corse 
Stood I to wail thy death, nor was my hand 
Stretched out to bear thee forth to burial. 

What sight is yonder? what this woman-throng 
Hitherward coming, by their sable garb 
Made manifest as mourners? What hath chanced? 
Doth some new sorrow hap within the home? 
Or rightly may I deem that they draw near 
Bearing libations, such as soothe the ire 
Of dead men angered, to my father's grave? 
Nay, such they are indeed; for I descry 
Electra mine own sister pacing hither, 
In moody grief conspicuous. Grant, O Zeus, 
Grant me my father's murder to avenge- 
Be thou my willing champion! 
Pylades, 
Pass we aside, till rightly I discern 
Wherefore these women throng in suppliance.  (PYLADES and ORESTES
withdraw; the CHORUS enters bearing vessels for libation; ELECTRA
follows them; they pace slowly towards the tomb of Agamemnon.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Forth from the royal halls by high command 
I bear libations for the dead. 
Rings on my smitten breast my smiting hand, 
And all my cheek is rent and red, 
Fresh-furrowed by my nails, and all my soul 
This many a day doth feed on cries of dole. 
And trailing tatters of my vest, 
In looped and windowed raggedness forlorn, 
Hang rent around my breast, 
Even as I, by blows of Fate most stern 
Saddened and torn. 

(antistrophe 1)

Oracular thro' visions, ghastly clear, 
Bearing a blast of wrath from realms below, 
And stiffening each rising hair with dread, 
Came out of dream-land Fear, 
And, loud and awful, bade 
The shriek ring out at midnight's witching hour, 
And brooded, stern with woe, 
Above the inner house, the woman's bower 
And seers inspired did read the dream on oath, 
Chanting aloud In realms below 
The dead are wroth; 
Against their slayers yet their ire doth glow. 

(strophe 2)

Therefore to bear this gift of graceless worth- 
O Earth, my nursing mother!- 
The woman god-accurs'd doth send me forth 
Lest one crime bring another. 
Ill is the very word to speak, for none 
Can ransom or atone 
For blood once shed and darkening the plain. 
O hearth of woe and bane, 
O state that low doth lie! 
Sunless, accursed of men, the shadows brood 
Above the home of murdered majesty. 

(antistrophe 2)

Rumour of might, unquestioned, unsubdued, 
Pervading ears and soul of lesser men, 
Is silent now and dead. 
Yet rules a viler dread; 
For bliss and power, however won, 
As gods, and more than gods, dazzle our mortal ken. 

Justice doth mark, with scales that swiftly sway, 
Some that are yet in light; 
Others in interspace of day and night, 
Till Fate arouse them, stay; 
And some are lapped in night, where all things are undone

(strophe 3)

On the life-giving lap of Earth 
Blood hath flowed forth; 
And now, the seed of vengeance, clots the plain- 
Unmelting, uneffaced the stain. 
And Ate tarries long, but at the last 
The sinner's heart is cast 
Into pervading, waxing pangs of pain. 

(antistrophe 3)

Lo, when man's force doth ope 
The virgin doors, there is nor cure nor hope 
For what is lost,-even so, I deem, 
Though in one channel ran Earth's every stream, 
Laving the hand defiled from murder's stain, 
It were in vain. 

(epode)

And upon me-ah me!-the gods have laid 
The woe that wrapped round Troy, 
What time they led me down from home and kin 
Unto a slave's employ- 
The doom to bow the head 
And watch our master's will 
Work deeds of good and ill- 
To see the headlong sway of force and sin, 
And hold restrained the spirit's bitter hate, 
Wailing the monarch's fruitless fate, 
Hiding my face within my robe, and fain 
Of tears, and chilled with frost of hidden pain. 

ELECTRA Handmaidens, orderers of the palace-halls, 
Since at my side ye come, a suppliant train, 
Companions of this offering, counsel me 
As best befits the time: for I, who pour 
Upon the grave these streams funereal, 
With what fair word can I invoke my sire? 
Shall I aver, Behold, I bear these gifts 
From well-loved wife unto her well-loved lord, 
When 'tis from her, my mother, that they come? 
I dare not say it: of all words I fail 
Wherewith to consecrate unto my sire 
These sacrificial honours on his grave. 
Or shall I speak this word, as mortals use- 
Give back, to those who send these coronals, 
Full recompense-of ills for acts malign? 
Or shall I pour this draught for Earth to drink, 
Sans word or reverence, as my sire was slain, 
And homeward pass with unreverted eyes, 
Casting the bowl away, as one who flings 
The household cleansings to the common road? 
Be art and part, O friends, in this my doubt, 
Even as ye are in that one common hate 
Whereby we live attended: fear ye not 
The wrath of any man, nor hide your word 
Within your breast: the day of death and doom 
Awaits alike the freeman and the slave. 
Speak, then, if aught thou know'st to aid us more. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Thou biddest; I will speak my soul's thought
out, 
Revering as a shrine thy father's grave. 

ELECTRA Say then thy say, as thou his tomb reverest. 

LEADER Speak solemn words to them that love, and pour. 

ELECTRA And of his kin whom dare I name as kind? 

LEADER Thyself; and next, whoe'er Aegisthus scorns. 

ELECTRA Then 'tis myself and thou, my prayer must name.

LEADER Whoe'er they be, 'tis thine to know and name them.

ELECTRA Is there no other we may claim as ours? 

LEADER Think of Orestes, though far-off he be. 

ELECTRA Right well in this too hast thou schooled my thought.

LEADER Mindfully, next, on those who shed the blood- 

ELECTRA Pray on them what? expound, instruct my doubt. 

LEADER This: Upon them some god or mortal come- 

ELECTRA As judge or as avenger? speak thy thought. 

LEADER Pray in set terms, Who shall the slayer slay. 

ELECTRA Beseemeth it to ask such boon of heaven? 

LEADER How not, to wreak a wrong upon a foe? 

ELECTRA  (praying at the tomb) O mighty Hermes, warder of the shades,

Herald of upper and of under world, 
Proclaim and usher down my prayer's appeal 
Unto the gods below, that they with eyes 
Watchful behold these halls. my sire's of old- 
And unto Earth, the mother of all things, 
And loster-nurse, and womb that takes their seed. 

Lo, I that pour these draughts for men now dead, 
Call on my father, who yet holds in ruth 
Me and mine own Orestes, Father, speak- 
How shall thy children rule thine halls again? 
Homeless we are and sold; and she who sold 
Is she who bore us; and the price she took 
Is he who joined with her to work thy death, 
Aegisthus, her new lord. Behold me here 
Brought down to slave's estate, and far away 
Wanders Orestes, banished from the wealth 
That once was thine, the profit of thy care, 
Whereon these revel in a shameful joy. 
Father, my prayer is said; 'tis thine to hear- 
Grant that some fair fate bring Orestes home, 
And unto me grant these-a purer soul 
Than is my mother's, a more stainless hand. 

These be my prayers for us; for thee, O sire, 
I cry that one may come to smite thy fops, 
And that the slayers may in turn be slain. 
Cursed is their prayer, and thus I bar its path, 
Praying mine own, a counter-curse on them. 
And thou, send up to us the righteous boon 
For which we pray; thine aids be heaven and earth, 
And justice guide the right to victory.  (To the CHORUS)  Thus have
I prayed, and thus I shed these streams, 
And follow ye the wont, and as with flowers 
Crown ye with many a tear and cry the dirge 
Your lips ring out above the dead man's grave.  (She pours the libations.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Woe, woe, woe! 
Let the teardrop fall, plashing on the ground 
Where our lord lies low: 
Fall and cleanse away the cursed libation's stair., 
Shed on this grave-mound, 
Fenced wherein together, gifts of good or bane 
From the dead are found. 
Lord of Argos, hearken! 
Though around thee darken 
Mist of death and hell, arise and hear 
Hearken and awaken to our cry of woe! 
Who with might of spear 
Shall our home deliver? 
Who like Ares bend until it quiver, 
Bend the northern bow? 
Who with hand upon the hilt himself will thrust with glaive,

Thrust and slay and save? 

ELECTRA Lo! the earth drinks them, to my sire they pass-  (She notices
the locks of ORESTES.)  Learn ye with me of this thing new and strange.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Speak thou; my breast doth palpitate with fear.

ELECTRA I see upon the tomb a curl new shorn. 

LEADER Shorn from wnat man or what deep-girded maid? 

ELECTRA That may he, guess who will; the sign is plain.

LEADER Let me learn this of thee; let youth prompt age.

ELECTRA None is there here but I, to clip such gift. 

LEADER For they who thus should mourn him hate him sore.

ELECTRA And lo! in truth the hair exceeding like- 

LEADER Like to what locks and whose? instruct me that. 

ELECTRA Like unto those my father's children wear. 

LEADER Then is this lock Orestes' secret gift? 

ELECTRA Most like it is unto the curls he wore. 

LEADER Yet how dared he to come unto his home? 

ELECTRA He hath but sent it, clipt to mourn his sire. 

LEADER It is a sorrow grievous as his death, 
That he should live yet never dare return. 

ELECTRA Yea, and my heart o'erflows with gall of grief,

And I am pierced as with a cleaving dart; 
Like to the first drops after drought, my tears 
Fall down at will, a bitter bursting tide, 
As on this lock I gaze; I cannot deem 
That any Argive save Orestes' self 
Was ever lord thereof; nor, well I wot, 
Hath she, the murd'ress, shorn and laid this lock 
To mourn him whom she slew-my mother she, 
Bearing no mother's heart, but to her race 
A loathing spirit, loathed itself of heaven! 
Yet to affirm, as utterly made sure, 
That this adornment cometh of the hand 
Of mine Orestes, brother of my soul, 
I may not venture, yet hope flatters fair! 
Ah well-a-day, that this dumb hair had voice 
To glad mine ears, as might a messenger, 
Bidding me sway no more 'twixt fear and hope, 
Clearly commanding, Cast me hence away, 
Clipped was I from some head thou lovest not; 
Or, I am kin to thee, and here, as thou, 
I come to weep and deck our father's grave. 
Aid me, ye gods! for well indeed ye know 
How in the gale and counter-gale of doubt, 
Like to the seaman's bark, we whirl and stray. 
But, if God will our life, how strong shall spring, 
From seed how small, the new tree of our home!- 
Lo ye, a second sign-these footsteps, looks- 
Like to my own, a corresponsive print; 
And look, another footmark,-this his own, 
And that the foot of one who walked with him. 
Mark, how the heel and tendons' print combine, 
Measured exact, with mine coincident! 
Alas, for doubt and anguish rack my mind.  (ORESTES and PYLADES enter
suddenly.)  

ORESTES Pray thou, in gratitude for prayers fulfilled, 
Fair fall the rest of what I ask of heaven. 

ELECTRA Wherefore? what win I from the gods by prayer? 

ORESTES This, that thine eyes behold thy heart's desire.

ELECTRA On whom of mortals know'st thou that I call? 

ORESTES I know thy yearning for Orestes deep. 

ELECTRA Say then, wherein event hath crowned my prayer?

ORESTES I, I am he; seek not one more akin. 

ELECTRA Some fraud, O stranger, weavest thou for me? 

ORESTES Against myself I weave it, if I weave. 

ELECTRA Ah, thou hast mind to mock me in my woel 

ORESTES 'Tis at mine own I mock then, mocking thine. 

ELECTRA Speak I with thee then as Orestes' self? 

ORESTES My very face thou see'st and know'st me not, 
And yet but now, when thou didst see the lock 
Shorn for my father's grave, and when thy quest 
Was eager on the footprints I had made, 
Even I, thy brother, shaped and sized as thou, 
Fluttered thy spirit, as at sight of me! 
Lay now this ringlet whence 'twas shorn, and judge, 
And look upon this robe, thine own hands' work, 
The shuttle-prints, the creature wrought thereon- 
Refrain thyself, nor prudence lose in joy, 
For well I wot, our kin are less than kind. 

ELECTRA O thou that art unto our father's home 
Love, grief and hope, for thee the tears ran down, 
For thee, the son, the saviour that should be; 
Trust thou thine arm and win thy father's halls! 
O aspect sweet of fourfold love to me, 
Whom upon thee the heart's constraint bids cal 
As on my father, and the claim of love 
From me unto my mother turns to thee, 
For she is very hate; to thee too turns 
What of my heart went out to her who died 
A ruthless death upon the altar-stone; 
And for myself I love thee-thee that wast 
A brother leal, sole stay of love to me. 
Now by thy side be strength and right, and Zeus 
Saviour almighty, stand to aid the twain! 

ORESTES Zeus, Zeus! look down on our estate and us, 
The orphaned brood of him, our eagle-sire, 
Whom to his death a fearful serpent brought, 
Enwinding him in coils; and we, bereft 
And foodless, sink with famine, all too weak 
To bear unto the eyrie, as he bore, 
Such quarry as he slew. Lo! I and she, 
Electra, stand before thee, fatherless, 
And each alike cast out and homeless made. 

ELECTRA And if thou leave to death the brood of him 
Whose altar blazed for thee, whose reverence 
Was thine, all thine,-whence, in the after years, 
Shall any hand like his adorn thy shrine 
With sacrifice of flesh? the eaglets slain, 
Thou wouldst not have a messenger to bear 
Thine omens, once so clear, to mortal men; 
So, if this kingly stock be withered all, 
None on high festivals will fend thy shrine. 
Stoop thou to raise us! strong the race shall grow, 
Though puny now it seem, and fallen low. 

LEADER O children, saviours of your father's home, 
Beware ye of your words, lest one should hear 
And bear them, for the tongue hath lust to tell, 
Unto our masters-whom God grant to me 
In pitchy reek of fun'ral flame to seel 

ORESTES Nay, mighty is Apollo's oracle 
And shall not fail me, whom it bade to pass 
Thro' all this peril; clear the voice rang out 
With many warnings, sternly threatening 
To my hot heart the wintry chill of pain, 
Unless upon the slayers of my sire 
I pressed for vengeance: this the god's command- 
That I, in ire for home and wealth despoiled, 
Should with a craft like theirs the slayers slay: 
Else with my very life I should atone 
This deed undone, in many a ghastly wise. 
For he proclaimed unto the ears of men 
That offerings, poured to angry powers of death, 
Exude again, unless their will be done, 
As grim disease on those that poured them forth- 
As leprous ulcers mounting on the flesh 
And with fell fangs corroding what of old 
Wore natural form; and on the brow arise 
White poisoned hairs, the crown of this disease. 
He spake moreover of assailing fiends 
Empowered to quit on me my father's blood, 
Wreaking their wrath on me, what time in night 
Beneath shut lids the spirit's eye sees clear. 
The dart that flies in darkness, sped from hell 
By spirits of the murdered dead who call 
Unto their kin for vengeance, formless fear, 
The night-tide's visitant, and madness' curse 
Should drive and rack me; and my tortured frame 
Should be chased forth from man's community 
As with the brazen scorpions of the scourge. 
For me and such as me no lustral bowl 
Should stand, no spilth of wine be poured to God 
For me, and wrath unseen of my dead sire 
Should drive me from the shrine; no man should dare 
To take me to his hearth, nor dwell with me: 
Slow, friendless, cursed of all should be mine end, 
And pitiless horror wind me for the grave. 
This spake the god-this dare I disobey? 
Yea, though I dared, the deed must yet be done; 
For to that end diverse desires combine,- 
The god's behest, deep grief for him who died, 
And last, the grievous blank of wealth despoiled- 
All these weigh on me, urge that Argive men, 
Minions of valour, who with soul of fire 
Did make of fenced Troy a ruinous heap, 
Be not left slaves to two and each a woman! 
For he, the man, wears woman's heart; if not, 
Soon shall he know, confronted by a man.  (ORESTES, ELECTRA, and the
CHORUS gather round the tomb of Agamemnon. The following lines are
chanted responsively.)  

CHORUS Mighty Fates, on you we call! 
Bid the will of Zeus ordain 
Power to those, to whom again 
Justice turns with hand and aid! 
Grievous was the prayer one made 
Grievous let the answer fall! 
Where the mighty doom is set, 
Justice claims aloud her debt. 
Who in blood hath dipped the steel, 
Deep in blood her meed shall feel 
List an immemorial word- 
Whosoe'er shall take the sword 
Shall perish by the sword. 

ORESTES Father, unblest in death, O father mine! 
What breath of word or deed 
Can I waft on thee from this far confine 
Unto thy lowly bed,- 
Waft upon thee, in midst of darkness lying, 
Hope's counter-gleam of fire? 
Yet the loud dirge of praise brings grace undying 
Unto each parted sire. 

CHORUS O child, the spirit of the dead, 
Altho' upon his flesh have fed 
The grim teeth of the flame, 
Is quelled not; after many days 
The sting of wrath his soul shall raise, 
A vengeance to reclaim! 
To the dead rings loud our cry- 
Plain the living's treachery- 
Swelling, shrilling, urged on high, 
The vengeful dirge, for parents slain, 
Shall strive and shall attain. 

ELECTRA Hear me too, even me, O father, hear! 
Not by one child alone these groans, these tears are shed

Upon thy sepulchre. 
Each, each, where thou art lowly laid, 
Stands, a suppliant, homeless made: 
Ah, and all is full of ill, 
Comfort is there none to say! 
Strive and wrestle as we may, 
Still stands doom invincible. 

CHORUS Nay, if so he will, the god 
Still our tears to joy can turn. 
He can bid a triumph-ode 
Drown the dirge beside this urn; 
He to kingly halls can greet 
The child restored, the homeward-guided feet. 

ORESTES Ah my father! hadst thou lain 
Under Ilion's wall, 
By some Lycian spearman slain, 
Thou hadst left in this thine hall 
Honour; thou hadst wrought for us 
Fame and life most glorious. 
Over-seas if thou hadst died, 
Heavily had stood thy tomb, 
Heaped on high; but, quenched in pride, 
Grief were light unto thy home. 

CHORUS Loved and honoured hadst thou lain 
By the dead that nobly fell, 
In the under-world again, 
Where are throned the kings of hell, 
Full of sway, adorable 
Thou hadst stood at their right hand- 
Thou that wert, in mortal land, 
By Fate's ordinance and law, 
King of kings who bear the crown 
And the staff, to which in awe 
Mortal men bow down. 

ELECTRA Nay, O father, I were fain 
Other fate had fallen on thee. 
Ill it were if thou hadst lain 
One among the common slain, 
Fallen by Scamander's side- 
Those who slew thee there should be! 
Then, untouched by slavery, 
We had heard as from afar 
Deaths of those who should have died 
'Mid the chance of war. 

CHORUS O child, forbear! things all too high thou sayest.

Easy, but vain, thy cry! 
A boon above all gold is that thou prayest, 
An unreached destiny, 
As of the blessed land that far aloof 
Beyond the north wind lies; 
Yet doth your double prayer ring loud reproof; 
A double scourge of sighs 
Awakes the dead; th' avengers rise, though late; 
Blood stains the guilty pride 
Of the accursed who rule on earth, and Fate 
Stands on the children's side. 

ELECTRA That hath sped thro' mine ear, like a shaft from a bow!

Zeus, Zeus! it is thou who dost send from below 
A doom on the desperate ere long 
On a mother a father shall visit his wrong. 

CHORUS Be it mine to upraise thro' the reek of the pyre

The chant of delight, while the funeral fire 
Devoureth the corpse of a man that is slain 
And a woman laid low! 
For who bids me conceal it! out-rending control, 
Blows ever the stern blast of hate thro' my soul, 
And before me a vision of wrath and of bane 
Flits and waves to and fro. 

ORESTES Zeus, thou alone to us art parent now. 
Smite with a rending blow 
Upon their heads, and bid the land be well: 
Set right where wrong hath stood; and thou give ear, 
O Earth, unto my prayer- 
Yea, hear O mother Earth, and monarchy of hell 

CHORUS Nay, the law is sternly set- 
Blood-drops shed upon the ground 
Plead for other bloodshed yet; 
Loud the call of death doth sound, 
Calling guilt of olden time, 
A Fury, crowning crime with crime. 

ELECTRA Where, where are ye, avenging powers, 
Puissant Furies of the slain? 
Behold the relics of the race 
Of Atreus, thrust from pride of place! 
O Zeus, what borne henceforth is ours, 
What refuge to attain? 

CHORUS Lo, at your wail my heart throbs, wildly stirred;

Now am I lorn with sadness, 
Darkened in all my soul, to hear your sorrow's word 
Anon to hope, the seat of strength, I rise,- 
She, thrusting grief away, lifts up mine eyes 
To the new dawn of gladness. 

ORESTES Skills it to tell of aught save wrong on wrong,

Wrought by our mother's deed? 
Though now she fawn for pardon, sternly strong 
Standeth our wrath, and will nor hear nor heed. 
Her children's soul is wolfish, born from hers, 
And softens not by prayers. 

CHORUS I dealt upon my breast the blow 
That Asian mourning women know; 
Wails from-my breast the fun'ral cry, 
The Cissian weeping melody; 
Stretched rendingly forth, to tatter and tear, 
My clenched hands wander, here and there, 
From head to breast; distraught with blows 
Throb dizzily my brows. 

ELECTRA Aweless in hate, O mother, sternly brave! 
As in a foeman's grave 
Thou laid'st in earth a king, but to the bier 
No citizen drew nears- 
Thy husband, thine, yet for his obsequies, 
Thou bad'st no wail arise! 

ORESTES Alas, the shameful burial thou dost speak! 
Yet I the vengeance of his shame will wreak- 
That do the gods command! 
That shall achieve mine hand! 
Grant me to thrust her life away, and 
Will dare to die! 

CHORUS List thou the deed! Hewn down and foully torn, 
He to the tomb was borne; 
Yea, by her hand, the deed who wrought, 
With like dishonour to the grave was brought, 
And by her hand she strove, with strong desire, 
Thy life to crush, O child, by murder of thy sire: 
Bethink thee, hearing, of the shame, the pain 
Wherewith that sire was slain! 

ELECTRA Yea, such was the doom of my sire; well-a-day, 
I was thrust from his side,- 
As a dog from the chamber they thrust me away, 
And in place of my laughter rose sobbing and tears, 
As in darkness I lay. 
O father, if this word can pass to thine ears, 
To thy soul let it reach and abide! 

CHORUS Let it pass, let it pierce, through the sense of thine ear,

To thy soul, where in silence it waiteth the hour! 
The past is accomplished; but rouse thee to hear 
What the future prepareth; awake and appear, 
Our champion, in wrath and in power! 

ORESTES O father, to thy loved ones come in aid. 

ELECTRA With tears I call on thee. 

CHORUS Listen and rise to light! 
Be thou with us, be thou against the foe! 
Swiftly this cry arises-even so 
Pray we, the loyal band, as we have prayed! 

ORESTES Let their might meet with mine, and their right with my right.

ELECTRA O ye Gods, it is yours to decree. 

CHORUS Ye call unto the dead; I quake to hear. 
Fate is ordained of old, and shall fulfil your prayer. 

ELECTRA Alas, the inborn curse that haunts our home, 
Of Ate's bloodstained scourge the tuneless sound! 
Alas, the deep insufferable doom, 
The stanchless wound! 

ORESTES It shall be stanched, the task is ours,- 
Not by a stranger's, but by kindred hand, 
Shall be chased forth the blood-fiend of our land. 
Be this our spoken spell, to call Earth's nether powers!

CHORUS Lords of a dark eternity, 
To you has come the children's cry, 
Send up from hell, fulfil your aid 
To them who prayed.  (The chant is concluded.)  

ORESTES O father, murdered in unkingly wise, 
Fulfil my prayer, grant me thine halls to sway. 

ELECTRA To me, too, grant this boon-dark death to deal 
Unto Aegisthus, and to 'scape my doom. 

ORESTES So shall the rightful feasts that mortals pay 
Be set for thee; else, not for thee shall rise 
The scented reek of altars fed with flesh, 
But thou shalt lie dishonoured: hear thou me! 

ELECTRA I too, from my full heritage restored, 
Will pour the lustral streams, what time I pass 
Forth as a bride from these paternal halls, 
And honour first, beyond all graves, thy tomb. 

ORESTES Earth, send my sire to fend me in the fight! 

ELECTRA Give fair-faced fortune, O Persephone! 

ORESTES Bethink thee, father, in the laver slain- 

ELECTRA Bethink thee of the net they handselled for thee!

ORESTES Bonds not of brass ensnared thee, father mine. 

ELECTRA Yea, the ill craft of an enfolding robe. 

ORESTES By this our bitter speech arise, O sire! 

ELECTRA Raise thou thine head at love's last, dearest call!

ORESTES Yea, speed forth Right to aid thy kinsmen's cause;

Grip for grip, let them grasp the foe, if thou 
Willest in triumph to forget thy fall. 

ELECTRA Hear me, O father, once again hear me. 
Lo! at thy tomb, two fledglings of thy brood- 
A man-child and a maid; hold them in ruth, 
Nor wipe them out, the last of Pelops' line. 
For while they live, thou livest from the dead; 
Children are memory's voices, and preserve 
The dead from wholly dying: as a net 
Is ever by the buoyant corks upheld, 
Which save the flax-mesh, in the depth submerged. 
Listen, this wail of ours doth rise for thee, 
And as thou heedest it thyself art saved. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS In sooth, a blameless prayer ye spake at length-

The tomb's requital for its dirge denied: 
Now, for the rest, as thou art fixed to do, 
Take fortune by the hand and work thy will. 

ORESTES The doom is set; and yet I fain would ask- 
Not swerving from the course of my resolve,- 
Wherefore she sent these offerings, and why 
She softens all too late her cureless deed? 
An idle boon it was, to send them here 
Unto the dead who recks not of such gifts. 
I cannot guess her thought, but well I ween 
Such gifts are skilless to atone such crime. 
Be blood once spilled, an idle strife he strives 
Who seeks with other wealth or wine outpoured 
To atone the deed. So stands the word, nor fails. 
Yet would I know her thought; speak, if thou knowest. 

LEADER I know it, son; for at her side I stood. 
'Twas the night-wandering terror of a dream 
That flung her shivering from her couch, and bade her- 
Her, the accursed of God-these offerings send. 

ORESTES Heard ye the dream, to tell it forth aright? 

LEADER Yea, from herself; her womb a serpent bare. 

ORESTES What then the sum and issue of the tale? 

LEADER Even as a swaddled child, she lull'd the thing. 

ORESTES What suckling craved the creature, born full-fanged?

LEADER Yet in her dreams she proffered it the breast. 

ORESTES How? did the hateful thing not bite her teat? 

LEADER Yea, and sucked forth a blood-gout in the milk. 

ORESTES Not vain this dream-it bodes a man's revenge. 

LEADER Then out of sleep she started with a cry, 
And thro' the palace for their mistress' aid 
Full many lamps, that erst lay blind with night, 
Flared into light; then, even as mourners use, 
She sends these offerings, in hope to win 
A cure to cleave and sunder sin from doom. 

ORESTES Earth and my father's grave, to you I call- 
Give this her dream fulfilment, and thro' me. 
I read it in each part coincident 
With what shall be; for mark, that serpent sprang 
From the same womb as I, in swaddling bands 
By the same hands was swathed, lipped the same breast, 
And sucking forth the same sweet mother's-milk 
Infused a clot of blood; and in alarm 
She cried upon her wound the cry of pain. 
The rede is clear: the thing of dread she nursed, 
The death of blood she dies; and I, 'tis I, 
In semblance of a serpent, that must slay her. 
Thou art my seer, and thus I read the dream. 

LEADER So do; yet ere thou doest, speak to us, 
Bidding some act, some, by not acting, aid. 

ORESTES Brief my command: I bid my sister pass 
In silence to the house, and all I bid 
This my design with wariness conceal, 
That they who did by craft a chieftain slay 
May by like craft and in like noose be talen, 
Dying the death which Loxias foretold- 
Apollo, king and prophet undisproved. 
I with this warrior Pylades will come 
In likeness of a stranger, full equipt 
As travellers come, and at the palace gates 
Will stand, as stranger yet in friendship's bond 
Unto this house allied; and each of us 
Will speak the tongue that round Parnassus sounds, 
Feigning such speech as Phocian voices use. 
And what if none of those that tend the gates 
Shall welcome us with gladness, since the house 
With ills divine is baunted? If this hap, 
We at the gate will bide, till, passing by, 
Some townsman make conjecture and proclaim, 
How? is Aegisthus here, and knowingly 
Keeps suppliants aloof, by bolt and bar? 
Then shall I win my way; and if I cross 
The threshold of the gate, the palace' guard, 
And find him throned where once my father sat- 
Or if he come anon, and face to face 
Confronting, drop his eyes from mine-I swear 
He shall not utter, Who art thou and whence? 
Ere my steel leap, and compassed round with death 
Low he shall lie: and thus, full-fed with doom, 
The Fury of the house shall drain once more 
A deep third draught of rich unmingled blood. 
But thou, O sister, look that all within 
Be well prepared to give these things event. 
And ye-I say 'twere well to bear a tongue 
Full of fair silence and of fitting speech 
As each beseems the time; and last, do thou, 
Hermes the warder-god, keep watch and ward, 
And guide to victory my striving sword.  (ORESTES, PYLADES, and ELECTRA
depart.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Many and marvellous the things of fear 
Earth's breast doth bear; 
And the sea's lap with many monsters teems, 
And windy levin-bolts and meteor gleams 
Breed many deadly things- 
Unknown and flying forms, with fear upon their wings, 
And in their tread is death; 
And rushing whirlwinds, of whose blasting breath 
Man's tongue can tell. 

(antistrophe 1)

But who can tell aright the fiercer thing, 
The aweless soul, within man's breast inhabiting? 
Who tell how, passion-fraught and love-distraught, 
The woman's eager, craving thought 
Doth wed mankind to woe and ruin fell? 
Yea, how the loveless love that doth posses 
The woman, even as the lioness, 
Doth rend and wrest apart, with eager strife, 
The link of wedded life? 

(strophe 2)

Let him be the witness, whose thought is not borne on light wings
thro' the air, 
But abideth with knowledge, what thing was wrought by Althea's despair;

For she marr'd the life-grace of her son, with ill counsel rekindled
the flame 
That was quenched as it glowed on the brand, what time from his mother
he came, 
With the cry of a new-born child; and the brand from the burning she
won, 
For the Fates had foretold it coeval, in life and in death, with her
son. 

(antistrophe 2)

Yea, and man's hate tells of another, even Scylla of murderous guile,

Who slew for an enemy's sake her father, won o'er by the wile

And the gifts of Cretan Minos, the gauds of the high-wrought gold;

For she clipped from her father's head the lock that should never
wax old, 
As he breathed in the silence of sleep, and knew not her craft and
her crime- 
But Hermes, the guard of the dead, doth grasp her, in fulness of time.

(strophe 3)

And since of the crimes of the cruel I tell, let my singing record

The bitter wedlock and loveless, the curse on these halls outpoured,

The crafty device of a woman, whereby did a chieftain fall,

A warrior stern in his wrath, the fear of his enemies all,-

A song of dishonour, untimely! and cold is the hearth that was warm,

And ruled by the cowardly spear, the woman's unwomanly arm.

(antistrophe 3)

But the summit and crown of all crimes is that which in Lemnos befell;

A woe and a mourning it is, a shame and a spitting to tell;

And he that in after time doth speak of his deadliest thought,

Doth say, It is like to the deed that of old time in Lemnos was wrought;

And loathed of men were the doers, and perished, they and their seed,

For the gods brought hate upon them; none loveth the impious deed.

(strophe 4)

It is well of these tales to tell; for the sword in the grasp of

Right 
With a cleaving, a piercing blow to the innermost heart doth smite,

And the deed unlawfully done is not trodden down nor forgot,

When the sinner out-steppeth the law and heedeth the high God not;

(antistrophe 4)

But justice hath planted the anvil, and Destiny forgeth the sword

That shall smite in her chosen time; by her is the child restored;

And, darkly devising, the Fiend of the house, world-cursed, will repay

The price of the blood of the slain, that was shed in the bygone day.
(The scene now is before the palace. ORESTES and PYLADES enter, still
dressed as travellers.)  

ORESTES  (knocking at the palace gate) What ho! slave, ho! I smite
the palace gate 
In vain, it seems; what ho, attend within,- 
Once more, attend; come forth and ope the halls, 
If yet Aegisthus holds them hospitable. 

SLAVE  (from within) Anon, anon!  (Opens the door)  Speak, from what
land art thou, and sent from whom? 

ORESTES Go, tell to them who rule the palace-halls, 
Since 'tis to them I come with tidings new- 
Delay not-Night's dark car is speeding on, 
And time is now for wayfarers to cast 
Anchor in haven, wheresoe'er a house 
Doth welcome strangers-that there now come forth 
Some one who holds authority within- 
The queen, or, if some man, more seemly were it; 
For when man standeth face to face with man, 
No stammering modesty confounds their speech, 
But each to each doth tell his meaning clear.  (CLYTEMNESTRA comes
out of the palace.)  

CLYTEMNESTRA Speak on, O strangers: have ye need of aught?

Here is whate'er beseems a house like this- 
Warm bath and bed, tired Nature's soft restorer, 
And courteous eyes to greet you; and if aught 
Of graver import needeth act as well, 
That, as man's charge, I to a man will tell. 

ORESTES A Daulian man am I, from Phocis bound, 
And as with mine own travel-scrip self-laden 
I went toward Argos, parting hitherward 
With travelling foot, there did encounter me 
One whom I knew not and who knew not me, 
But asked my purposed way nor hid his own, 
And, as we talked together, told his name- 
Strophius of Phocis; then he said, "Good sir, 
Since in all case thou art to Argos bound, 
Forget not this my message, heed it well, 
Tell to his own, Orestes is no more. 
And-whatsoe'er his kinsfolk shall resolve. 
Whether to bear his dust unto his home, 
Or lay him here, in death as erst in life 
Exiled for aye, a child of banishment- 
Bring me their hest, upon thy backward road; 
For now in brazen compass of an urn 
His ashes lie, their dues of weeping paid." 
So much I heard, and so much tell to thee, 
Not knowing if I speak unto his kin 
Who rule his home; but well, I deem, it were, 
Such news should earliest reach a parent's ear. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Ah woe is me! thy word our ruin tells; 
From roof-tree unto base are we despoiled.- 
O thou whom nevermore we wrestle down, 
Thou Fury of this home, how oft and oft 
Thou dost descry what far aloof is laid, 
Yea, from afar dost bend th' unerring bow 
And rendest from my wretchedness its friends; 
As now Orestes-who, a brief while since, 
Safe from the mire of death stood warily,- 
Was the home's hope to cure th' exulting wrong; 
Now thou ordainest, Let the ill abide. 

ORESTES To host and hostess thus with fortune blest, 
Lief had I come with better news to bear 
Unto your greeting and acquaintanceship; 
For what goodwill lies deeper than the bond 
Of guest and host? and wrong abhorred it were, 
As well I deem, if I, who pledged my faith 
To one, and greetings from the other had, 
Bore not aright the tidings 'twixt the twain. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Whate'er thy news, thou shalt not welcome lack,

Meet and deserved, nor scant our grace shall be. 
Hadst thou thyself not come, such tale to tell, 
Another, sure, had borne it to our ears. 
But lo! the hour is here when travelling guests, 
Fresh from the daylong labour of the road, 
Should win their rightful due.  (To the slave)  Take him within

To the man-chamber's hospitable rest- 
Him and these fellow-farers at his side; 
Give them such guest-right as beseems our halls; 
I bid thee do as thou shalt answer for it, 
And I unto the prince who rules our home 
Will tell the tale, and, since we lack not friends, 
With them will counsel how this hap to bear.  (CLYTEMNESTRA goes back
into the palace. ORESTES and PYLADES are conducted to the guest quarters.)

CHORUS  (singing) So be it done- 
Sister-servants, when draws nigh 
Time for us aloud to cry 
Orestes and his victory? 

O holy earth and holy tomb 
Over the grave-pit heaped on high, 
Where low doth Agamemnon lie, 
The king of ships, the army's lord! 
Now is the hour-give ear and come, 
For now doth Craft her aid afford, 
And Hermes, guard of shades in hell, 
Stands o'er their strife, to sentinel 
The dooming of the sword. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS I wot the stranger worketh woe within-

For lo! I see come forth, suffused with tears, 
Orestes' nurse.  (The NURSE enters from the palace.)  What ho, Kilissa-thou

Beyond the doors? Where goest thou? Methinks 
Some grief unbidden walketh at thy side. 

NURSE My mistress bids me, with what speed I may, 
Call in Aegisthus to the stranger guests, 
That he may come, and stinding face to face, 
A man with men, way thus more clearly learn 
This rumour new. Thus speaking, to her slaves 
Laughter for what is wrought-to her desire 
Too well; but ill, ill, ill besets the house, 
Brought by the tale these guests have told so clear. 
And he, God wot, will gladden all his heart 
Hearing this rumour. Woe and well-a-day! 
The bitter mingled cup of ancient woes, 
Hard to be borne, that here in Atreus' house 
Befell, was grievous to mine inmost heart, 
But never yet did I endure such pain. 
All else I bore with set soul patiently; 
But now-alack, alack!--Orestes dear, 
The day and night-long travail of my soul 
Whom from his mother's womb, a new-born child, 
I clasped and cherished! Many a time and oft 
Toilsome and profitless my service was, 
When his shrill outcry called me from my couch! 
For the young child, before the sense is born, 
Hath but a dumb thing's life, must needs be nursed 
As its own nature bids. The swaddled thing 
Hath nought of speech, whate'er discomfort come,- 
Hunger or thirst or lower weakling need,- 
For the babe's stomach works its own relief. 
Which knowing well before, yet oft surprised, 
'Twas mine to cleanse the swaddling clothes-poor 
Was nurse to tend and fuller to make white: 
Two works in one, two handicrafts I took, 
When in mine arms the father laid the boy. 
And now he's dead-alack and well-a-day! 
Yet must I go to him whose wrongful power 
Pollutes this house-fair tidings these to him! 

LEADER Say then, with what array she bids him come? 

NURSE What say'st thou! Speak. more clearly for mine ear.

LEADER Bids she bring henchmen, or to come alone? 

NURSE She bids him bring a spear-armed body-guard. 
Nay, tell not that unto our loathed lord, 
But speed to him, put on the mien of joy, 
Say, Come alone, fear nought, the news is good: 
A bearer can tell straight a twisted tale. 

NURSE Does then thy mind in this new tale find joy? 

LEADER What if Zeus bid our ill wind veer to fair? 

NURSE And how? the home's hope with Orestes dies. 

LEADER Not yet-a seer, though feeble, this might see. 

NURSE What say'st thou? Know'st thou aught, this tale belying?

LEADER Go, tell the news to him, perform thine hest,- 
What the gods will, themselves can well provide. 

NURSE Well, I will go, herein obeying thee; 
And luck fall fair, with favour sent from heaven.  (She goes out.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Zeus, sire of them who on Olympus dwell, 
Hear thou, O hear my prayer! 
Grant to my rightful lords to prosper well 
Even as their zeal is fair! 
For right, for right goes up aloud my cry- 
Zeus, aid him, stand anigh! 

(refrain 1)

Into his father's hall he goes 
To smite his father's foes. 
Bid him prevail by thee on throne of triumph set, 
Twice, yea and thrice with joy shall he acquit the debt.

(antistrophe 1)

Bethink thee, the young steed, the orphan foal 
Of sire beloved by thee, unto the car 
Of doom is harnessed fast. 
Guide him aright, plant firm a lasting goal, 
Speed thou his pace,-O that no chance may mar 
The homeward course, the last! 

(strophe 2)

And ye who dwell within the inner chamber 
Where shines the stored joy of gold- 
Gods of one heart, O hear ye, and remember; 
Up and avenge the blood shed forth of old, 
With sudden rightful blow; 
Then let the old curse die, nor be renewed 
With progeny of blood,- 
Once more, and not again, be latter guilt laid low! 

(refrain 2)

O thou who dwell'st in Delphi's mighty cave, 
Grant us to see this home once more restored 
Unto its rightful lord! 
Let it look forth, from veils of death, with joyous eye 
Unto the dawning light of liberty; 

(antistrophe 2)

And Hermes, Maia's child, lend hand to save, 
Willing the right, and guide 
Our state with Fortune's breeze adown the favouring tide.

Whate'er in darkness hidden lies, 
He utters at his will; 
He at his will throws darkness on our eyes, 
By night and eke by day inscrutable. 

(strophe 3)

Then, then shall wealth atone 
The ills that here were done. 
Then, then will we unbind, 
Fling free on wafting wind 
Of joy, the woman's voice that waileth now 
In piercing accents for a chief laid low; 

(refrain 3)

And this our song shall be- 
Hail to the commonwealth restored! 
Hail to the freedom won to me! 
All hail! for doom hath passed from him, my well-loved lord!

(antistrophe 3)

And thou, O child, when Time and Chance agree, 
Up to the deed that for thy sire is done! 
And if she wail unto thee, Spare, O son- 
Cry, Aid, O father-and achieve the deed, 
The horror of man's tongue, the gods' great need! 
Hold in thy breast such heart as Perseus had, 
The bitter woe work forth, 
Appease the summons of the dead, 
The wrath of friends on earth; 
Yea, set within a sign of blood and doom, 
And do to utter death him that polilites thy home.  (AEGISTHUS enters
alone.)  

AEGISTHUS Hither and not unsummoned have I come; 
For a new rumour, borne by stranger men 
Arriving hither, hath attained mine ears, 
Of hap unwished-for, even Orestes' death. 
This were new sorrow, a blood-bolter'd load 
Laid on the house that doth already bow 
Beneath a former wound that festers deep. 
Dare I opine these words have truth and life? 
Or are they tales, of woman's terror born, 
That fly in the void air, and die disproved? 
Canst thou tell aught, and prove it to my soul? 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS What we have heard, we heard; go thou within

Thyself to ask the strangers of their tale. 
Strengthless are tidings, thro' another heard; 
Question is his, to whom the tale is brought. 

AEGISTHUS I too will meet and test the messenger, 
Whether himself stood witness of the death, 
Or tells it merely from dim rumour learnt: 
None shall cheat me, whose soul hath watchful eyes.  (He goes into
the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Zeus, Zeus! what word to me is given?

What cry or prayer, invoking heaven, 
Shall first by me be uttered? 
What speech of craft-nor all revealing, 
Nor all too warily concealing- 
Ending my speech, shall aid the deed? 
For lo! in readiness is laid 
The dark emprise, the rending blade; 
Blood-dropping daggers shall achieve 
The dateless doom of Atreus' name, 
Or-kindling torch and joyful flame 
In sign of new-won liberty- 
Once more Orestes shall retrieve 
His father's wealth, and, throned on high, 
Shall hold the city's fealty. 
So mighty is the grasp whereby, 
Heaven-holpen, he shall trip and throw, 
Unseconded, a double foe. 
Ho for the victory!  (A loud cry is heard within.)  

VOICE OF AEGISTHUS Help, help, alas! 

CHORUS Ho there, ho I how is't within? 
Is't done? is't over? Stand we here aloof 
While it is wrought, that guiltless we may seem 
Of this dark deed; with death is strife fulfilled.  (An ATTENDANT
enters from the palace.)  

ATTENDANT O woe, O woe, my lord is done to death! 
Woe, woe, and woe again, Aegisthus gone! 
Hasten, fling wide the doors, unloose the bolts 
Of the queen's chamber. O for some young strength 
To match the need! but aid availeth nought 
To him laid low for ever. Help, help, help 
Sure to deaf ears I shout, and call in vain 
To slumber ineffectual. What ho! 
The queen! how fareth Clytemnestra's self? 
Her neck too, hers, is close upon the steel, 
And soon shall sing, hewn thro' as justice wills.  (CLYTEMNESTRA enters.)

CLYTEMNESTRA What ails thee, raising this ado for us? 

ATTENDANT I say the dead are come to slay the living. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Alack, I read thy riddles all too clear- 
We slew by craft and by like craft shall die. 
Swift, bring the axe that slew my lord of old; 
I'll know anon or death or victory- 
So stands the curse, so I confront it here.  (ORESTES rushes from
the palace; his sword dripping with blood. PYLADES is with him.)

ORESTES Thee too I seek: for him what's done will serve.

CLYTEMNESTRA Woe, woe! Aegisthus, spouse and champion, slain!

ORESTES What, lov'st the man? then in his grave lie down,

Be his in death, desert him nevermore! 

CLYTEMNESTRA Stay, child, and fear to strike. O son, this breast

Pillowed thine head full oft, while, drowsed with sleep,

Thy toothless mouth drew mother's milk from me. 

ORESTES Can I my mother spare? speak, Pylades. 

PYLADES Where then would fall the hest Apollo gave 
At Delphi, where the solemn compact sworn? 
Choose thou the hate of all men, not of gods. 

ORESTES Thou dost prevail; I hold thy counsel good.  (To CLYTEMNESTRA)
Follow; I will to slay thee at his side. 
With him whom in his life thou loved'st more 
Than Agamemnon, sleep in death, the meed 
For hate where love, and love where hate was due! 

CLYTEMNESTRA I nursed thee young; must I forego mine eld?

ORESTES Thou slew'st my father; shalt thou dwell with me?

CLYTEMNESTRA Fate bore a share in these things, O my child

ORESTES Fate also doth provide this doom for thee. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Beware, O child, a parent's dying curse. 

ORESTES A parent who did cast me out to ill! 

CLYTEMNESTRA Not cast thee out, but to a friendly home.

ORESTES Born free, I was by twofold bargain sold. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Where then the price that I received for thee?

ORESTES The price of shame; I taunt thee not more plainly.

CLYTEMNESTRA Nay, but recount thy father's lewdness too.

ORESTES Home-keeping, chide not him who toils without. 

CLYTEMNESTRA 'Tis hard for wives to live as widows, child.

ORESTES The absent husband toils for them at home. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Thou growest fain to slay thy mother, child.

ORESTES Nay, 'tis thyself wilt slay thyself, not I. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Beware thy mother's vengeful hounds from hell.

ORESTES How shall I 'scape my father's, sparing thee? 

CLYTEMNESTRA Living, I cry as to a tomb, unheard. 

ORESTES My father's fate ordains this doom for thee. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Ah me! this snake it was I bore and nursed.

ORESTES Ay, right prophetic was thy visioned fear. 
Shameful thy deed was-die the death of shame!  (He drives her into
the house before him.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Lo, even for these I mourn, a double death:

Yet since Orestes, driven on by doom, 
Thus crowns the height of murders manifold, 
I say, 'tis well-that not in night and death 
Should sink the eye and light of this our home. 

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

There came on Priam's race and name 
A vengeance; though it tarried long, 
With heavy doom it came. 
Came, too, on Agamemnon's hall 
A lion-pair, twin swordsmen strong. 
And last, the heritage doth fall 
To him, to whom from Pythian cave 
The god his deepest counsel gave. 

(refrain 1)

Cry out, rejoice! our kingly hall 
Hath 'scaped from ruin-ne'er again 
Its ancient wealth be wasted all 
By two usurpers, sin-defiled- 
An evil path of woe and bane! 

(antistrophe 1)

On him who dealt the dastard blow 
Comes Craft, Revenge's scheming child. 
And hand in hand with him doth go, 
Eager for fight, 
The child of Zeus, whom men below 
Call justice, naming her aright. 
And on her foes her breath 
Is as the blast of death; 

(strophe 2)

For her the god who dwells in deep recess 
Beneath Parnassus' brow, 
Summons with loud acclaim 
To rise, though late and lame, 
And come with craft that worketh righteousness. 

For even o'er Powers divine this law is strong- 
Thou shalt not serve the wrong. 

(refrain 2)

To that which ruleth heaven beseems it that we bow 
Lo, freedom's light hath come! 
Lo, now is rent away 
The grim and curbing bit that held us dumb. 
Up to the light, ye halls I this many a day 
Too low on earth ye lay. 

(antistrophe 2)

And Time, the great Accomplisher, 
Shall cross the threshold, whensoe'er 
He choose with purging hand to cleanse 
The palace, driving all pollution thence. 
And fair the cast of Fortune's die 
Before our state's new lords shall lie, 
Not as of old, but bringing fairer doom. 
Lo, freedom's light hath come!  (The central doors of the palace open,
disclosing ORESTES standing over the corpses of AEGISTHUS and CLYTEMNESTRA;
in one hand he holds his sword, in the other the robe in which AGAMEMNON
was entangled and slain.)  

ORESTES There lies our country's twofold tyranny, 
My father's slayers, spoilers of my home. 
Erst were they royal, sitting on the throne, 
And loving are they yet,-their common fate 
Tells the tale truly, shows their trothplight firm. 
They swore to work mine ill-starred father's death, 
They swore to die together; 'tis fulfilled. 
O ye who stand, this great doom's witnesses, 
Behold this too, the dark device which bound 
My sire unhappy to his death,-behold 
The mesh which trapped his hands, enwound his feet 
Stand round, unfold it-'tis the trammel-net 
That wrapped a chieftain; hold it that he see, 
The father-not my sire, but he whose eye 
Is judge of all things, the all-seeing Sun! 
Let him behold my mother's damned deed, 
Then let him stand, when need shall be to me, 
Witness that justly I have sought and slain 
My mother; blameless was Aegisthus' doom- 
He died the death law bids adulterers die. 
But she who plotted this accursed thing 
To slay her lord, by whom she bare beneath 
Her girdle once the burden of her babes, 
Beloved erewhile, now turned to hateful foes- 
What deem ye of her? or what venomed thing, 
Sea-snake or adder, had more power than she 
To poison with a touch the flesh unscarred? 
So great her daring, such her impious will. 
How name her, if I may not speak a curse? 
A lion-springe! a laver's swathing cloth, 
Wrapping a dead man, twining round his feet- 
A net, a trammel, an entangling robe? 
Such were the weapon of some strangling thief, 
The terror of the road, a cut-purse hound- 
With such device full many might he kill, 
Full oft exult in heat of villainy. 
Ne'er have my house so cursed an indweller- 
Heaven send me, rather, childless to be slain! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Woe for each desperate deed! 
Woe for the queen, with shame of life bereft! 
And ah, for him who still is left, 
Madness, dark blossom of a bloody seed! 

ORESTES Did she the deed or not? this robe gives proof,

Imbrued with blood that bathed Aegisthus' sword: 
Look, how the spurted stain combines with time 
To blur the many dyes that once adorned 
Its pattern manifold! I now stand here, 
Made glad, made sad with blood, exulting, wailing- 
Hear, O thou woven web that slew my sire! 
I grieve for deed and death and all my home- 
Victor, pollution's damned stain for prize. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Alas, that none of mortal men 
Can pass his life untouched by pain! 
Behold, one woe is here- 
Another loometh near. 

ORESTES Hark ye and learn-for what the end shall be 
For me I know not: breaking from the curb 
My spirit whirls me off, a conquered prey, 
Borne as a charioteer by steeds distraught 
Far from the course, and madness in my breast 
Burneth to chant its song, and leap, and rave- 
Hark ye and learn, friends, ere my reason goes! 
I say that rightfully I slew my mother, 
A thing God-scorned, that foully slew my sire. 
And chiefest wizard of the spell that bound me 
Unto this deed I name the Pythian seer 
Apollo, who foretold that if I slew, 
The guilt of murder done should pass from me; 
But if I spared, the fate that should be mine 
I dare not blazon forth-the bow of speech 
Can reach not to the mark, that doom to tell. 
And now behold me, how with branch and crown 
I pass, a suppliant made meet to go 
Unto Earth's midmost shrine, the holy ground 
Of Loxias, and that renowned light 
Of ever-burning fire, to 'scape the doom 
Of kindred murder: to no other shrine, 
So Loxias bade, may I for refuge turn. 
Bear witness, Argives, in the after time, 
How came on me this dread fatality. 
Living, I pass a banished wanderer hence, 
To leave in death the memory of this cry. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Nay, but the deed is well; link not thy lips

To speech ill-starred, nor vent ill-boding words- 
Who hast to Argos her full freedom given, 
Lopping two serpents' heads with timely blow. 

ORESTES Look, look, alas! 
Handmaidens, see-what Gorgon shapes throng up 
Dusky their robes and all their hair enwound- 
Snakes coiled with snakes-off, off,-I must away! 

LEADER Most loyal of all sons unto thy sire, 
What visions thus distract thee? Hold, abide; 
Great was thy victory, and shalt thou fear? 

ORESTES These are no dreams, void shapes of haunting ill,

But clear to sight another's hell-hounds come! 

LEADER Nay, the fresh bloodshed still imbrues thine hands,

And thence distraction sinks into thy soul. 

ORESTES O king Apollo-see, they swarm and throng- 
Black blood of hatred dripping from their eyes! 

LEADER One remedy thou hast; go, touch the shrine 
Of Loxias, and rid thee of these woes. 

ORESTES Ye can behold them not, but I behold them. 
Up and away! I dare abide no more.  (He rushes out.)  

LEADER Farewell then as thou mayst,-the god thy friend 
Guard thee and aid with chances favouring. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Behold, the storm of woe divine 
That raves and beats on Atreus' line 
Its great third blast hath blown. 
First was Thyestes' loathly woe 
The rueful feast of long ago, 
On children's flesh, unknown. 
And next the kingly chief's despite, 
When he who led the Greeks to fight 
Was in the bath hewn down. 
And now the offspring of the race 
Stands in the third, the saviour's place, 
To save-or to consume? 
O whither, ere it be fulfilled, 
Ere its fierce blast be hushed and stilled, 
Shall blow the wind of doom? 

THEEND

 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the temple of APOLLO at Delphi. The PYTHIAN PRIESTESS enters
and approaches the doors of the temple.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

THE PYTHIAN PRIESTESS First, in this prayer, of all the gods I name

The prophet-mother Earth; and Themis next, 
Second who sat-for so with truth is said- 
On this her mother's shrine oracular. 
Then by her grace, who unconstrained allowed, 
There sat thereon another child of Earth- 
Titanian Phoebe. She, in after time, 
Gave o'er the throne, as birthgift to a god, 
Phoebus, who in his own bears Phoebe's name. 
He from the lake and ridge of Delos' isle 
Steered to the port of Pallas' Attic shores, 
The home of ships; and thence he passed and came 
Unto this land and to Pamassus' shrine. 
And at his side, with awe revering him, 
There went the children of Hephaestus' seed, 
The hewers of the sacred way, who tame 
The stubborn tract that erst was wilderness. 
And all this folk, and Delphos, chieftain-king 
Of this their land, with honour gave him home; 
And in his breast Zeus set a prophet's soul, 
And gave to him this throne, whereon he sits, 
Fourth prophet of the shrine, and, Loxias hight, 
Gives voice to that which Zeus his sire decrees. 

Such gods I name in my preluding prayer, 
And after them, I call with honour due 
On Pallas, wardress of the fane, and Nymphs 
Who dwell around the rock Corycian, 
Where in the hollow cave, the wild birds' haunt, 
Wander the feet of lesser gods; and there, 
Right well I know it, Bromian Bacchus dwells, 
Since he in godship led his Maenad host, 
Devising death for Pentheus, whom they rent 
Piecemeal, as hare among the hounds. And last, 
I call on Pleistus' springs, Poseidon's might, 
And Zeus most high, the great Accomplisher. 
Then as a seeress to the sacred chair 
I pass and sit; and may the powers divine 
Make this mine entrance fruitful in response 
Beyond each former advent, triply blest. 
And if there stand without, from Hellas bound, 
Men seeking oracles, let each pass in 
In order of the lot, as use allows; 
For the god guides whate'er my tongue proclaims.  (She goes into the
interior of the temple; after a short interval, she returns in great
fear.)  Things fell to speak of, fell for eyes to see, 
Have sped me forth again from Loxias' shrine, 
With strength unstrung, moving erect no more, 
But aiding with my hands my failing feet, 
Unnerved by fear. A beldame's force is naught- 
Is as a child's, when age and fear combine. 
For as I pace towards the inmost fane 
Bay-filleted by many a suppliant's hand, 
Lo, at the central altar I descry 
One crouching as for refuge-yea, a man 
Abhorred of heaven; and from his hands, wherein 
A sword new-drawn he holds, blood reeked and fell: 
A wand he bears, the olive's topmost bough, 
Twined as of purpose with a deep close tuft 
Of whitest wool. This, that I plainly saw, 
Plainly I tell. But lo, in front of him, 
Crouched on the altar-steps, a grisly band 
Of women slumbers-not like women they, 
But Gorgons rather; nay, that word is weak, 
Nor may I match the Gorgons' shape with theirs! 
Such have I seen in painted semblance erst- 
Winged Harpies, snatching food from Phineus' board,- 
But these are wingless, black, and all their shape 
The eye's abomination to behold. 
Fell is the breath-let none draw nigh to it- 
Exude the damned drops of poisonous ire: 
And such their garb as none should dare to bring 
To statues of the gods or homes of men. 
I wot not of the tribe wherefrom can come 
So fell a legion, nor in what land Earth 
Could rear, unharmed, such creatures, nor avow 
That she had travailed and had brought forth death. 
But, for the rest, be all these things a carp 
Unto the mighty Loxias, the lord 
Of this our shrine: healer and prophet he, 
Discerner he of portents, and the cleanser 
Of other homes-behold, his own to cleanse!  (She goes out. The central
doors open, disclosing the interior of the temple. ORESTES clings
to the central altar; the FURIES lie slumbering at a little distance;
APOLLO and HERMES appear from the innermost shrine.)  

APOLLO  (to ORESTES) Lo, I desert thee never: to the end,

Hard at thy side as now, or sundered far, 
I am thy guard, and to thine enemies 
Implacably oppose me: look on them, 
These greedy fiends, beneath my craft subdued I 
See, they are fallen on sleep, these beldames old, 
Unto whose grim and wizened maidenhood 
Nor god nor man nor beast can e'er draw near. 
Yea, evil were they born, for evil's doom, 
Evil the dark abyss of Tartarus 
Wherein they dwell, and they themselves the hate 
Of men on earth, and of Olympian gods. 
But thou, flee far and with unfaltering speed; 
For they shall hunt thee through the mainland wide 
Where'er throughout the tract of travelled earth 
Thy foot may roam, and o'er and o'er the seas 
And island homes of men. Faint not nor fail, 
Too soon and timidly within thy breast 
Shepherding thoughts forlorn of this thy toil; 
But unto Pallas' city go, and there 
Crouch at her shrine, and in thine arms enfold 
Her ancient image: there we well shall find 
Meet judges for this cause and suasive pleas, 
Skilled to contrive for thee deliverance 
For by my hest thou didst thy mother slay. 

ORESTES O king Apollo, since right well thou know'st 
What justice bids, have heed, fulfil the same,- 
Thy strength is all-sufficient to achieve. 

APOLLO Have thou too heed, nor let thy fear prevail 
Above thy will. And do thou guard him, Hermes, 
Whose blood is brother unto mine, whose sire 
The same high God. Men call thee guide and guard, 
Guide therefore thou and guard my suppliant; 
For Zeus himself reveres the outlaw's right, 
Boon of fair escort, upon man conferred.  (APOLLO, HERMES, and ORESTES
go out. The GHOST OF CLYTEMNESTRA rises.)  

GHOST OF CLYTEMNESTRA Sleep on! awake! what skills your sleep to
me- 
Me, among all the dead by you dishonoured- 
Me from whom never, in the world of death, 
Dieth this course, 'Tis she who smote and slew, 
And shamed and scorned I roam? Awake, and hear 
My plaint of dead men's hate intolerable. 
Me, sternly slain by them that should have loved, 
Me doth no god arouse him to avenge, 
Hewn down in blood by matricidal hands. 
Mark ye these wounds from which the heart's blood ran, 
And by whose hand, bethink ye! for the sense 
When shut in sleep hath then the spirit-sight, 
But in the day the inward eye is blind. 
List, ye who drank so oft with lapping tongue 
The wineless draught by me outpoured to soothe 
Your vengeful ire! how oft on kindled shrine 
I laid the feast of darkness, at the hour 
Abhorred of every god but you alone! 
Lo, all my service trampled down and scorned! 
And he bath baulked your chase, as stag the hounds; 
Yea, lightly bounding from the circling toils, 
Hath wried his face in scorn, and flieth far. 
Awake and hear-for mine own soul I cry- 
Awake, ye powers of hell! the wandering ghost 
That once was Clytemnestra calls-Arise!  (The FURIES mutter grimly,
as in a dream.)  Mutter and murmur! He hath flown afar- 
My kin have gods to guard them, I have none!  (The FURIES mutter as
before.)  O drowsed in sleep too deep to heed my pain! 
Orestes flies, who me, his mother, slew.  (The FURIES give a confused
cry.)  Yelping, and drowsed again? Up and be doing 
That which alone is yours, the deed of hell!  (The FURIES give another
cry.)  Lo, sleep and toil, the sworn confederates, 
Have quelled your dragon-anger, once so fell! 

THE FURIES  (muttering more fiercely and loudly) Seize, seize, seize,
seize-mark, yonder! 

GHOST In dreams ye chase a prey, and like some hound, 
That even in sleep doth ply woodland toil, 
Ye bell and bay. What do ye, sleeping here? 
Be not o'ercome with toil, nor, sleep-subdued, 
Be heedless of my wrong. Up! thrill your heart 
With the just chidings of my tongue,-Such words 
Are as a spur to purpose firmly held. 
Blow forth on him the breath of wrath and blood, 
Scorch him with reek of fire that burns in you, 
Waste him with new pursuit-swift, hound him down!  (The GHOST sinks.)

FIRST FURY  (awaking) Up! rouse another as I rouse thee; up!

Sleep'st thou? Rise up, and spurning sleep away, 
See we if false to us this prelude rang. 

CHORUS OF FURIES  (singing, strophe 1)

Alack, alack, O sisters, we have toiled, 
O much and vainly have we toiled and borne! 
Vainly! and all we wrought the gods have foiled, 
And turned us to scorn! 
He hath slipped from the net, whom we chased: he hath 'scaped us who
should be our prey- 
O'ermastered by slumber we sank, and our quarry hath stolen away!

(antistrophe 1)

Thou, child of the high God Zeus, Apollo, hast robbed us and wronged;

Thou, a youth, hast down-trodden the right that to godship more ancient
belonged; 
Thou hast cherished thy suppliant man; the slayer, the God- forsaken,

The bane of a parent, by craft from out of our grasp thou hast taken;

A god, thou hast stolen from us the avengers a matricide son-

And who shall consider thy deed and say, It is rightfully done?

(strophe 2)

The sound of chiding scorn 
Came from the land of dream; 
Deep to mine inmost heart I felt it thrill and burn, 
Thrust as a strong-grasped goad, to urge 
Onward the chariot's team. 
Thrilled, chilled with bitter inward pain 
I stand as one beneath the doomsman's scourge. 

(antistrophe 2)

Shame on the younger gods who tread down right, 
Sitting on thrones of might! 
Woe on the altar of earth's central fane! 
Clotted on step and shrine, 
Behold, the guilt of blood, the ghastly stain! 

(strophe 3)

Woe upon thee, Apollo! uncontrolled, 
Unbidden, hast thou, prophet-god, imbrued 
The pure prophetic shrine with wrongful blood! 
For thou too heinous a respect didst hold 
Of man, too little heed of powers divine! 
And us the Fates, the ancients of the earth, 
Didst deem as nothing worth. 

(antistrophe 3)

Scornful to me thou art, yet shalt not fend 
My wrath from him; though unto hell he flee, 
There too are we! 
And he the blood-defiled, should feel and rue, 
Though I were not, fiend-wrath that shall not end, 
Descending on his head who foully slew.  (APOLLO enters from the inner
shrine.)  

APOLLO Out! I command you. Out from this my home- 
Haste, tarry not! Out from the mystic shrine, 
Lest thy lot be to take into thy breast 
The winged bright dart that from my golden string 
Speeds hissing as a snake,-lest, pierced and thrilled 
With agony, thou shouldst spew forth again 
Black frothy heart's-blood, drawn from mortal men, 
Belching the gory clots sucked forth from wounds. 
These be no halls where such as you can prowl- 
Go where men lay on men the doom of blood, 
Heads lopped from necks, eyes from their spheres plucked out,

Hacked flesh, the flower of youthful seed crushed out, 
Feet hewn away, and hands, and death beneath 
The smiting stone, low moans and piteous 
Of men impaled-Hark, hear ye for what feast 
Ye hanker ever, and the loathing gods 
Do spit upon your craving? Lo, your shape 
Is all too fitted to your greed; the cave 
Where lurks some lion, lapping gore, were home 
More meet for you. Avaunt from sacred shrines, 
Nor bring pollution by your touch on all 
That nears yuu. Hence! and roam unshepherded- 
No god there is to tend such herd as you. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O king Apollo, in our turn hear us.

Thou hast not only part in these ill things, 
But art chief cause and doer of the same. 

APOLLO How? stretch thy speech to tell this, and have done.

LEADER Thine oracle bade this man slay his mother. 

APOLLO I bade him quit his sire's death,-wherefore not?

LEADER Then didst thou aid and guard red-handed crime. 

APOLLO Yea, and I bade him to this temple flee. 

LEADER And yet forsooth dost chide us following him!, 

APOLLO Ay-not for you it is, to near this fane. 

LEADER Yet is such office ours, imposed by fate. 

APOLLO What office? vaunt the thing ye deem so fair. 

LEADER From home to home we chase the matricide. 

APOLLO What? to avenge a wife who slays her lord? 

LEADER That is not blood outpoured by kindred hands. 

APOLLO How darkly ye dishonour and annul 
The troth to which the high accomplishers, 
Hera and Zeus, do honour. Yea, and thus 
Is Aphrodite to dishonour cast, 
The queen of rapture unto mortal men. 
Know, that above the marriage-bed ordained 
For man and woman staddeth Right as guard, 
Enhancing sanctity of trothplight sworn; 
Therefore, if thou art placable to those 
Who have their consort slain, nor will'st to turn 
On them the eye of wrath, unjust art thou 
In hounding to his doom the man who slew 
His mother. Lo, I know thee full of wrath 
Against one deed, but all too placable 
Unto the other, minishing the crime. 
But in this cause shall Pallas guard the right. 

LEADER Deem not my quest shall ever quit that man. 

APOLLO Follow then, make thee, double toil in vain 

LEADER Think not by speech mine office to curtail. 

APOLLO None hast thou, that I would accept of thee! 

LEADER Yea, high thine honour by the throne of Zeus: 
But I, drawn on by scent of mother's blood, 
Seek vengeance on this man and hound him down.  (The CHORUS goes in
pursuit of ORESTES.)  

APOLLO But I will stand beside him; 'tis for me 
To guard my suppliant: gods and men alike 
Do dread the curse of such an one betrayed, 
And in me Fear and Will say Leave him not.  (He goes into the temple., The scene changes to Athens. In the foreground is the Temple of
ATHENA on the Acropolis; her statue stands in the centre; ORESTES
is seen clinging to it.)  

ORESTES Look on me, queen Athena; lo, I come 
By Loxias' behest; thou of thy grace 
Receive me, driven of avenging powers- 
Not now a red-hand slayer unannealed, 
But with guilt fading, half-effaced, outworn 
On many homes and paths of mortal men. 
For to the limit of each land, each sea, 
I roamed, obedient to Apollo's best, 
And come at last, O Goddess, to thy fane, 
And clinging to thine image, bide my doom.  (The CHORUS OF FURIES
enters, questing like hounds.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Ho! clear is here the trace of him we seek:

Follow the track of blood, the silent sign! 
Like to some hound that hunts a wounded fawn, 
We snuff along the scent of dripping gore, 
And inwardly we pant, for many a day 
Toiling in chase that shall fordo the man; 
For o'er and o'er the wide land have I ranged, 
And o'er the wide sea, flying without wings, 
Swift as a sail I pressed upon his track, 
Who now hard by is crouching, well I wot, 
For scent of mortal blood allures me here. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Follow, seek him-round and round 
Scent and snuff and scan the ground, 
Lest unharmed he slip away, 
He who did his mother slay! 
Hist-he is there! See him his arms entwine 
Around the image of the maid divine- 
Thus aided, for the deed he wrought 
Unto the judgment wills he to be brought. 

It may not be! a mother's blood, poured forth 
Upon the stained earth, 
None gathers up: it lies-bear witness, Hell!- 
For aye indelible 
And thou who sheddest it shalt give thine own 
That shedding to atone! 
Yea, from thy living limbs I suck it out, 
Red, clotted, gout by gout,- 
A draught abhorred of men and gods; but 
Will drain it, suck thee dry; 
Yea, I will waste thee living, nerve and vein; 
Yea, for thy mother slain, 
Will drag thee downward, there where thou shalt dree 
The weird of agony! 
And thou and whosoe'er of men hath sinned- 
Hath wronged or God, or friend, 
Or parent,-learn ye how to all and each 
The arm of doom can reach! 
Sternly requiteth, in the world beneath, 
The judgment-seat of Death; 
Yea, Death, beholding every man's endeavour, 
Recordeth it for ever. 

ORESTES I, schooled in many miseries, have learnt 
How many refuges of cleansing shrines 
And when imposeth silence. Lo, I stand 
Fixed now to speak, for he whose word is wise 
Commands the same. Look, how the stain of blood 
Is dull upon mine hand and wastes away, 
And laved and lost therewith is the deep curse 
Of matricide; for while the guilt was new, 
'Twas banished from me at Apollo's hearth, 
Atoned and purified by death of swine. 
Long were my word if I should sum the tale, 
How oft since then among my fellow-men 
I stood and brought no curse. Time cleanses all- 
Time, the coeval of all things that are. 
Now from pure lips, in words of omen fair, 
I call Athena, lady of this land, 
To come, my champion: so, in aftertime, 
She shall not fail of love and service leal, 
Not won by war, from me and from my land 
And all the folk of Argos, vowed to her. 
Now, be she far away in Libyan land 
Where flows from Triton's lake her natal wave,- 
Stand she with planted feet, or in some hour 
Of rest conceal them, champion of her friends 
Where'er she be,-Or whether o'er the plain 
Phlegraean she look forth, as warrior bold- 
I cry to her to come, where'er she be, 
(And she, as goddess, from afar can hear) 
And aid and free me, set among my foes. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Thee not Apollo nor Athena's strength

Can save from perishing, a castaway 
Amid the Lost, where no delight shall meet 
Thy soul-a bloodless prey of nether powers, 
A shadow among shadows. Answerest thou 
Nothing? dost cast away my words with scorn, 
Thou, prey prepared and dedicate to me? 
Not as a victim slain upon the shrine, 
But living shalt thou see thy flesh my food. 
Hear now the binding chant that makes thee mine. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Weave the weird dance,-behold the hour

To utter forth the chant of hell, 
Our sway among mankind to tell, 
The guidance of our power. 
Of justice are we ministers, 
And whosoe'er of men may stand 
Lifting a pure unsullied hand, 
That man no doom of ours incurs, 
And walks thro' all his mortal path 
Untouched by woe, unharmed by wrath. 
But if, as yonder man, he hath 
Blood on the hands he strives to hide, 
We stand avengers at his side, 
Decreeing, Thou hast wronged the dead: 
We are doom's witnesses to thee. 
The price of blood, his hands have shed, 
We wring from him; in life, in death, 
Hard at his side are we! 

(strophe 1)

Night, Mother Night, who brought me forth, a torment 
To living men and dead, 
Hear me, O hear! by Leto's stripling son 
I am dishonoured: 
He hath ta'en from me him who cowers in refuge, 
To me made consecrates- 
A rightful victim, him who slew his mother, 
Given o'er to me and fate. 

(refrain 1)

Hear the hymn of hell, 
O'er the victim sounding,- 
Chant of frenzy, chant of ill, 
Sense and will confounding! 
Round the soul entwining 
Without lute or lyre- 
Soul in madness pining, 
Wasting as with fire! 

(antistrophe 1)

Fate, all-pervading Fate, this service spun, commanding

That I should bide therein: 
Whosoe'er of mortals, made perverse and lawless, 
Is stained with blood of kin, 
By his side are we, and hunt him ever onward, 
Till to the Silent Land, 
The realm of death, he cometh; neither yonder 
In freedom shall he stand. 

(refrain 1)

Hear the hymn of hell, 
O'er the victim sounding,- 
Chant of frenzy, chant of ill, 
Sense and will confounding! 
Round the soul entwining 
Without lute or lyre- 
Soul in madness pining, 
Wasting as with fire! 

(strophe 2)

When from womb of Night we sprang, on us this labour 
Was laid and shall abide. 
Gods immortal are ye, yet beware ye touch not 
That which is our pride! 
None may come beside us gathered round the blood-feast- 
For us no garments white 
Gleam on a festal day; for us a darker fate is, 
Another darker rite. 

(refrain 2)

That is mine hour when falls an ancient line 
When in the household's heart 
The God of blood doth slay by kindred hands,- 
Then do we bear our part: 
On him who slays we sweep with chasing cry: 
Though he be triply strong, 
We wear and waste him; blood atones for blood, 
Yew pain for ancient wrong. 

(antistrophe 2)

I hold this task-'tis mine, and not another's. 
The very gods on high, 
Though they can silence and annul the prayers 
Of those who on us cry, 
They may not strive with us who stand apart, 
A race by Zeus abhorred, 
Blood-boltered, held unworthy of the council 
And converse of Heaven's lord. 

(strophe 3)

Therefore the more I leap upon my prey; 
Upon their head I bound; 
My foot is hard; as one that trips a runner 
I cast them to the ground; 
Yea, to the depth of doom intolerable; 
And they who erst were great, 
And upon earth held high their pride and glory, 
Are brought to low estate. 
In underworld they waste and are diminished, 
The while around them fleet 
Dark wavings of my robes, and, subtly woven, 
The paces of my feet. 

(antistrophe 3)

Who falls infatuate, he sees not neither knows he 
That we are at his side; 
So closely round about him, darkly flitting, 
The cloud of guilt doth glide. 
Heavily 'tis uttered, how around his hearthstone 
The mirk of hell doth rise. 

(strophe 4)

Stern and fixed the law is; we have hands t' achieve it,

Cunning to devise. 
Queens are we and mindful of our solemn vengeance. 
Not by tear or prayer 
Shall a man avert it. In unhonoured darkness, 
Far from gods, we fare, 
Lit unto our task with torch of sunless regions, 
And o'er a deadly way- 
Deadly to the living as to those who see not 
Life and light of day- 
Hunt we and press onward. 

(antistrophe 4)

Who of mortals hearing 
Doth not quake for awe, 
Hearing all that Fate thro' hand of God hath given us 
For ordinance and law? 
Yea, this right to us, in dark abysm and backward 
Of ages it befell: 
None shall wrong mine office, tho' in nether regions 
And sunless dark I dwell.  (ATHENA enters.)  

ATHENA Far off I heard the clamour of your cry, 
As by Scamander's side I set my foot 
Asserting right upon the land given o'er 
To me by those who o'er Achaea's host 
Held sway and leadership: no scanty part 
Of all they won by spear and sword, to me 
They gave it, land and all that grew thereon, 
As chosen heirloom for my Theseus' clan. 
Thence summoned, sped I with a tireless foot,- 
Hummed on the wind, instead of wings, the fold 
Of this mine aegis, by my feet propelled, 
As, linked to mettled horses, speeds a car. 
And now, beholding here Earth's nether brood, 
I fear it nought, yet are mine eyes amazed 
With wonder. Who are ye? of all I ask, 
And of this stranger to my statue clinging. 
But ye-your shape is like no human form, 
Like to no goddess whom the gods behold, 
Like to no shape which mortal women wear. 
Yet to stand by and chide a monstrous form 
Is all unjust-from such words Right revolts. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O child of Zeus, one word shall tell thee all.

We are the children of eternal Night, 
And Furies in the underworld are called. 

ATHENA I know your lineage now and eke your name. 

LEADER Yea, and eftsoons indeed my rights shalt know. 

ATHENA Fain would I learn them; speak them clearly forth,

LEADER We chase from home the murderers of men. 

ATHENA And where at last can he that slew make pause? 

LEADER Where this is law-All joy abandon here. 

ATHENA Say, do ye bay this man to such a flight? 

LEADER Yea, for of choice he did his mother slay. 

ATHENA Urged by no fear of other wrath and doom? 

LEADER What spur can rightly goad to matricide? 

ATHENA Two stand to plead-one only have I heard. 

LEADER He wiR not swear nor challenge us to oath. 

ATHENA The form of justice, not its deed, thou willest.

LEADER Prove thou that word; thou art not scant of skill.

ATHENA I say that oaths shall not enforce the wrong. 

LEADER Then test the cause, judge and award the right. 

ATHENA Will ye to me then this decision trust? 

LEADER Yea, reverencing true child of worthy sire. 

ATHENA  (to ORESTES) O man unknown, make thou thy plea in turn.

Speak forth thy land, thy lineage, and thy woes; 
Then, if thou canst, avert this bitter blame- 
If, as I deem, in confidence of right 
Thou sittest hard beside my holy place, 
Clasping this statue, as Ixion sat, 
A sacred suppliant for Zeus to cleanse,- 
To all this answer me in words made plain. 

ORESTES O queen Athena, first from thy last words 
Will I a great solicitude remove. 
Not one blood-guilty am I; no foul stain 
Clings to thine image from my clinging hand; 
Whereof one potent proof I have to tell. 
Lo, the law stands-The slayer shall not plead, 
Till by the hand of him who cleanses blood 
A suckling creature's blood besprinkle him. 
Long since have I this expiation done,- 
In many a home, slain beasts and running streams 
Have cleansed me. Thus I speak away that fear. 
Next, of my lineage quickly thou shalt learn: 
An Argive am I, and right well thou know'st 
My sire, that Agamemnon who arrayed 
The fleet and them that went therein to war- 
That chief with whom thy hand combined to crush 
To an uncitied heap what once was Troy; 
That Agamemnon, when he homeward came, 
Was brought unto no honourable death, 
Slain by the dark-souled wife who brought me forth 
To him,-enwound and slain in wily nets, 
Blazoned with blood that in the laver ran. 
And I, returning from an exiled youth, 
Slew her, my mother-lo, it stands avowed! 
With blood for blood avenging my loved sire; 
And in this deed doth Loxias bear part, 
Decreeing agonies, to goad my will, 
Unless by me the guilty found their doom. 
Do thou decide if right or wrong were done- 
Thy dooming, whatsoe'er it be, contents me. 

ATHENA Too mighty is this matter, whosoe'er 
Of mortals claims to judge hereof aright. 
Yea, me, even me, eternal Right forbids 
To judge the issues of blood-guilt, and wrath 
That follows swift behind. This too gives pause, 
That thou as one with all due rites performed 
Dost come, unsinning, pure, unto my shrine. 
Whate'er thou art, in this my city's name, 
As uncondemned, I take thee to my side.- 
Yet have these foes of thine such dues by fate, 
O'erthrown in judgment of the cause, forthwith 
Their anger's poison shall infect the land- 
A dropping plague-spot of eternal ill. 
Thus stand we with a woe on either hand: 
Stay they, or go at my commandment forth, 
Perplexity or pain must needs befall. 
Yet, as on me Fate hath imposed the cause, 
I choose unto me judges that shall be 
An ordinance for ever, set to rule 
The dues of blood-guilt, upon oath declared. 
But ye, call forth your witness and your proof, 
Words strong for justice, fortified by oath; 
And I, whoe'er are truest in my town, 
Them will I choose and bring, and straitly charge, 
Look on this cause, discriminating well, 
And pledge your oath to utter nought of wrong.  (ATHENA withdraws.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Now are they all undone, the ancient laws, 
If here the slayer's cause 
Prevail; new wrong for ancient right shall be 
If matricide go free. 
Henceforth a deed like his by all shall stand, 
Too ready to the hand: 
Too oft shall parents in the aftertime 
Rue and lament this crime,- 
Taught, not in false imagining, to feel 
Their children's thrusting steel: 
No more the wrath, that erst on murder fell 
From us, the queens of Hell, 
Shall fall, no more our watching gaze impend- 
Death shall smite unrestrained. 

(antistrophe 1)

Henceforth shall one unto another cry 
Lo, they are stricken, lo, they fall and die 
Around me! and that other answers him, 
O thou that lookest that thy woes should cease, 
Behold, with dark increase 
They throng and press upon thee; yea, and dim 
Is all the cure, and every comfort vain! 

(strophe 2)

Let none henceforth cry out, when falls the blow 
Of sudden-smiting woe, 
Cry out in sad reiterated strain 
O Justice, aid! aid, O ye thrones of Hell! 
So though a father or a mother wail 
New-smitten by a son, it shall no more avail, 
Since, overthrown by wrong, the fane of justice fell! 

(antistrophe 2)

Know, that a throne there is that may not pass away, 
And one that sitteth on it-even Fear, 
Searching with steadfast eyes man's inner soul: 
Wisdom is child of pain, and born with many a tear; 
But who henceforth, 
What man of mortal men, what nation upon earth, 
That holdeth nought in awe nor in the light 
Of inner reverence, shall worship Right 
As in the older day? 

(strophe 3)

Praise not, O man, the life beyond control, 
Nor that which bows unto a tyrant's sway. 
Know that the middle way 
Is dearest unto God, and they thereon who wend, 
They shall achieve the end; 
But they who wander or to left or right 
Are sinners in his sight. 
Take to thy heart this one, this soothfast word- 
Of wantonness impiety is sire; 
Only from calm control and sanity unstirred 
Cometh true weal, the goal of every man's desire. 

(antistrophe 3)

Yea, whatsoe'er befall, hold thou this word of mine: 
Bow down at Justice' shrine, 
Turn thou thine eyes away from earthly lure, 
Nor witk a godless foot that altar spurn. 
For as thou dost shall Fate do in return, 
And the great doom is sure. 
Therefore let each adore a parent's trust, 
And each with loyalty revere the guest 
That in his halls doth rest. 

(strophe 4)

For whoso uncompelled doth follow what is just, 
He ne'er shall be unblest; 
Yea, never to the gulf of doom 
That man shall come. 

But he whose will is set against the gods, 
Who treads beyond the law with foot impure, 
Till o'er the wreck of Right confusion broods,- 
Know that for him, though now he sail secure, 
The day of storm shall be; then shall he strive and fail

Down from the shivered yard to furl the sail, 

(antistrophe 4)

And call on Powers, that heed him nought, to save, 
And vainly wrestle with the whirling wave. 
Hot was his heart with pride- 
I shall not fall, he cried. 
But him with watching scorn 
The god beholds, forlorn, 
Tangled in toils of Fate beyond escape, 
Hopeless of haven safe beyond the cape- 
Till all his wealth and bliss of bygone day 
Upon the reef of Rightful Doom is hurled, 
And he is rapt away 
Unwept, for ever, to the dead forgotten world.  (ATHENA enters, with
TWELVE ATHENIAN CITIZENS. A large crowd follows.)  

ATHENA O herald, make proclaim, bid all men come. 
Then let the shrill blast of the Tyrrhene trump, 
Fulfilled with mortal breath, thro' the wide air 
Peal a loud summons, bidding all men heed. 
For, till my judges fill this judgment-seat, 
Silence behoves,-that this whole city learn, 
What for all time mine ordinance commands, 
And these men, that the cause be judged aright.  (APOLLO enters.)

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O king Apollo, rule what is thine own,

But in this thing what share pertains to thee? 

APOLLO First, as a witness come I, for this man 
Is suppliant of mine by sacred right, 
Guest of my holy hearth and cleansed by me 
Of blood-guilt: then, to set me at his side 
And in his cause bear part, as part I bore 
Erst in his deed, whereby his mother fell. 
Let whoso knoweth now announce the cause. 

ATHENA  (to the CHORUS) 'Tis I announce the cause-first speech be
yours; 
For rightfully shall they whose plaint is tried 
Tell the tale first and set the matter clear. 

LEADER Though we be many, brief shall be our tale.  (To ORESTES)
Answer thou, setting word to match with word; 
And first avow-hast thou thy mother slain? 

ORESTES I slew her. I deny no word hereof. 

LEADER Three falls decide the wrestle-this is one. 

ORESTES Thou vauntest thee-but o'er no final fall. 

LEADER Yet must thou tell the manner of thy deed. 

ORESTES Drawn sword in hand, I gashed her neck. 'Tis told.

LEADER But by whose word, whose craft, wert thou impelled?

ORESTES By oracles of him who here attests me. 

LEADER The prophet-god bade thee thy mother slay? 

ORESTES Yea, and thro' him less ill I fared, till now. 

LEADER If the vote grip thee, thou shalt change that word.

ORESTES Strong is my hope; my buried sire shall aid. 

LEADER Go to now, trust the dead, a matricide! 

ORESTES Yea, for in her combined two stains of sin. 

LEADER How? speak this clearly to the judges' mind. 

ORESTES Slaying her husband, she did slay my sire. 

LEADER Therefore thou livest; death assoils her deed. 

ORESTES Then while she lived why didst thou hunt her not?

LEADER She was not kin by blood to him she slew. 

ORESTES And I, am I by blood my mother's kin? 

LEADER O cursed with murder's guilt, how else wert thou

The burden of her womb? Dost thou forswear 
Thy mother's kinship, closest bond of love? 

ORESTES It is thine hour, Apollo-speak the law, 
Averring if this deed were justly done; 
For done it is, and clear and undenied. 
But if to thee this murder's cause seem right 
Or wrongful, speak-that I to these may tell. 

APOLLO To you, Athena's mighty council-court, 
Justly for justice will I plead, even I, 
The prophet-god, nor cheat you by one word. 
For never spake I from my prophet-seat 
One word, of man, of woman, or of state, 
Save what the Father of Olympian gods 
Commanded unto me. I rede you then, 
Bethink you of my plea, how strong it stands, 
And follow the decree of Zeus our sire,- 
For oaths prevail not over Zeus' command. 

LEADER Go to; thou sayest that from Zeus befell 
The oracle that this Orestes bade 
With vengeance quit the slaying of his sire, 
And hold as nought his mother's right of kin! 

APOLLO Yea, for it stands not with a common death, 
That he should die, a chieftain and a king 
Decked with the sceptre which high heaven confers- 
Die, and by female hands, not smitten down 
By a far-shooting bow, held stalwartly 
By some strong Amazon. Another doom 
Was his: O Pallas, hear, and ye who sit 
In judgment, to discern this thing aright!- 
She with a specious voice of welcome true 
Hailed him, returning from the mighty mart 
Where war for life gives fame, triumphant home; 
Then o'er the laver, as he bathed himself, 
She spread from head to foot a covering net, 
And in the endless mesh of cunning robes 
Enwound and trapped her lord, and smote him down. 
Lo, ye have heard what doom this chieftain met, 
The majesty of Greece, the fleet's high lord: 
Such as I tell it, let it gall your ears, 
Who stand as judges to decide this cause. 

LEADER Zeus, as thou sayest, holds a father's death 
As first of crimes,-yet he of his own act 
Cast into chains his father, Cronus old: 
How suits that deed with that which now ye tell? 
O ye who judge, I bid ye mark my words! 

APOLLO O monsters loathed of all, O scorn of gods, 
He that hath bound may loose: a cure there is. 
Yea, many a plan that can unbind the chain. 
But when the thirsty dust sucks up man's blood 
Once shed in death, he shall arise no more. 
No chant nor charm for this my Sire hath wrought. 
All else there is, he moulds and shifts at will, 
Not scant of strength nor breath, whate'er he do. 

LEADER Think yet, for what acquittal thou dost plead: 
He who hath shed a mother's kindred blood, 
Shall he in Argos dwell, where dwelt his sire? 
How shall he stand before the city's shrines, 
How share the clansmen's holy lustral bowl? 

APOLLO This too I answer; mark a soothfast word 
Not the true parent is the woman's womb 
That bears the child; she doth but nurse the seed 
New-sown: the male is parent; she for him, 
As stranger for a stranger, hoards the germ 
Of life, unless the god its promise blight. 
And proof hereof before you will I set. 
Birth may from fathers, without mothers, be: 
See at your side a witness of the same, 
Athena, daughter of Olympian Zeus, 
Never within the darkness of the womb 
Fostered nor fashioned, but a bud more bright 
Than any goddess in her breast might bear. 
And I, O Pallas, howsoe'er I may, 
Henceforth will glorify thy town, thy clan, 
And for this end have sent my suppliant here 
Unto thy shrine; that he from this time forth 
Be loyal unto thee for evermore, 
O goddess-queen, and thou unto thy side 
Mayst win and hold him faithful, and his line, 
And that for aye this pledge and troth remain 
To children's children of AtheniaD seed. 

ATHENA Enough is said; I bid the judges now 
With pure intent deliver just award. 

LEADER We too have shot our every shaft of speech, 
And now abide to hear the doom of law. 

ATHENA  (to APOLLO AND ORESTES) Say, how ordaining shall I 'scape
your blame? 

APOLLO I spake, ye heard; enough. O stranger men, 
Heed well your oath as ye decide the cause. 

ATHENA O men of Athens, ye who first do judge 
The law of bloodshed, hear me now ordain. 
Here to all time for Aegeus' Attic host 
Shall stand this council-court of judges sworn, 
Here the tribunal, set on Ares' Hill 
Where camped of old the tented Amazons, 
What time in hate of Theseus they assailed 
Athens, and set against her citadel 
A counterwork of new sky-pointing towers, 
And there to Ares held their sacrifice, 
Where now the rock hath name, even Ares' Hill. 
And hence shall Reverence and her kinsman Fear 
Pass to each free man's heart, by day and night 
Enjoining, Thou shalt do no unjust thing, 
So long as law stands as it stood of old 
Unmarred by civic change. Look you, the spring 
Is pure; but foul it once with influx vile 
And muddy clay, and none can drink thereof. 
Therefore, O citizens, I bid ye bow 
In awe to this command, Let no man live, 
Uncurbed by law nor curbed by tyranny; 
Nor banish ye the monarchy of Awe 
Beyond the walls; untouched by fear divine, 
No man doth justice in the world of men. 
Therefore in purity and holy dread 
Stand and revere; so shall ye have and hold 
A saving bulwark of the state and land, 
Such as no man hath ever elsewhere known, 
Nor in far Scythia, nor in Pelops' realm. 
Thus I ordain it now, a council-court 
Pure and unsullied by the lust of gain, 
Sacred and swift to vengeance, wakeful ever 
To champion men who sleep, the country's guard. 
Thus have I spoken, thus to mine own clan 
Commended it for ever. Ye who judge, 
Arise, take each his vote, mete out the right, 
Your oath revering. Lo, my word is said.  (The twelve judges come
forward, one by one, to the urns of decision; the first votes; as
each of the others follows, the LEADER and APOLLO speak alternately.)

LEADER I rede ye well, beware! nor put to shame, 
In aught, this grievous company of hell. 

APOLLO I too would warn you, fear mine oracles- 
From Zeus they are,-nor make them void of fruit. 

LEADER Presumptuous is thy claim, blood-guilt to judge,

And false henceforth thine oracles shall be. 

APOLLO Failed then the counsels of my sire, when turned

Ixion, first of slayers, to his side? 

LEADER These are but words; but I, if justice fail me, 
Will haunt this land in grim and deadly deed. 

APOLLO Scorn of the younger and the elder gods 
Art thou: 'tis I that shall prevail anon. 

LEADER Thus didst thou too of old in Pheres' halls, 
O'erreaching Fate to make a mortal deathless. 

APOLLO Was it not well, my worshipper to aid, 
Then most of all when hardest was the need? 

LEADER I say thou didst annul the lots of life, 
Cheating with wine the deities of eld. 

APOLLO I say thou shalt anon, thy pleadings foiled, 
Spit venom vainly on thine enemies. 

LEADER Since this young god o'errides mine ancient right,

I tarry but to claim your law, not knowing 
If wrath of mine shall blast your state or spare. 

ATHENA Mine is the right to add the final vote, 
And I award it to Orestes' cause. 
For me no mother bore within her womb, 
And, save for wedlock evermore eschewed, 
I vouch myself the champion of the man, 
Not of the woman, yea, with all my soul,- 
In heart, as birth, a father's child alone. 
Thus will I not too heinously regard 
A woman's death who did her husband slay, 
The guardian of her home; and if the votes 
Equal do fall, Orestes shall prevail. 
Ye of the judges who are named thereto, 
Swiftly shake forth the lots from either urn.  (Two judges come forward,
one to each urn.)  

ORESTES O bright Apollo, what shall be the end? 

LEADER O Night, dark mother mine, dost mark these things?

ORESTES Now shall my doom be life, or strangling cords.

LEADER And mine, lost honour or a wider sway. 

APOLLO O stranger judges, sum aright the count 
Of votes cast forth, and, parting them, take heed 
Ye err not in decision. The default 
Of one vote only bringeth ruin deep, 
One, cast aright. doth stablish house and home. 

ATHENA Behold, this man is free from guilt of blood, 
For half the votes condemn him, half set free! 

ORESTES O Pallas, light and safety of my home, 
Thou, thou hast given me back to dwell once more 
In that my fatherland, amerced of which 
I wandered; now shall Grecian lips say this, 
The man is Argive once again, and dwells 
Again within kiss father's wealthy hall, 
By Pallas saved, by Loxias, and by Him, 
The great third saviour, Zeus omnipotent- 
Who thus in pity for my father's fate 
Doth pluck me from my doom, beholding these, 
Confederates of my mother. Lo, I pass 
To mine own home, but proffering this vow 
Unto thy land and people: Nevermore, 
Thro' all the manifold years of Time to be, 
Shall any chieftain of mine Argive land 
Bear hitherward his spears for fight arrayed. 
For we, though lapped in earth we then shall lie, 
By thwart adversities will work our will 
On them who shall transgress this oath of mine, 
Paths of despair and journeyings ill-starred 
For them ordaining, till their task they rue. 
But if this oath be rightly kept, to them 
Will we the dead be full of grace, the while 
With loyal league they honour Pallas' town. 
And now farewell, thou and thy city's folk- 
Firm be thine arms' grasp, closing with thy foes, 
And, strong to save, bring victory to thy spear.  (ORESTES and APOLLO
depart.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) Woe on you, younger gods! the ancient right

Ye have o'erridden, rent it from my hands. 

I am dishonoured of you, thrust to scorn! 
But heavily my wrath 
Shall on this land fling forth the drops that blast and burn,

Venom of vengeance, that shall work such scathe 
As I have suffered; where that dew shall fall, 
Shall leafless blight arise, 
Wasting Earth's offspring,-Justice, hear my call!- 
And thorough all the land in deadly wise 
Shall scatter venom, to exude again 
In pestilence on men. 
What cry avails me now, what deed of blood, 
Unto this land what dark despite? 
Alack, alack, forlorn 
Are we, a bitter injury have borne! 
Alack, O sisters, O dishonoured brood 
Of mother Night! 

ATHENA Nay, bow ye to my words, chafe not nor moan: 
Ye are not worsted nor disgraced; behold, 
With balanced vote the cause had issue fair, 
Nor in the end did aught dishonour thee. 
But thus the will of Zeus shone clearly forth, 
And his own prophet-god avouched the same, 
Orestes slew: his slaying is atoned. 
Therefore I pray you, not upon this land 
Shoot forth the dart of vengeance; be appeased, 
Nor blast the land with blight, nor loose thereon 
Drops of eternal venom, direful darts 
Wasting and marring nature's seed of growth. 
For I, the queen of Athens' sacred right, 
Do pledge to you a holy sanctuary 
Deep in the heart of this my land, made just 
By your indwelling presence, while ye sit 
Hard by your sacred shrines that gleam with oil 
Of sacrifice, and by this folk adored. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Woe on you, younger gods! the ancient right

Ye have o'erridden, rent it from my hands. 

I am dishonoured of you, thrust to scorn! 
But heavily my wrath 
Shall on this land fling forth the drops that blast and burn,

Venom of vengeance, that shall work such scathe 
As I have suffered; where that dew shall fall, 
Shall leafless blight arise, 
Wasting Earth's offspring,-justice, hear my call!- 
And thorough all the land in deadly wise 
Shall scatter venom, to exude again 
In pestilence on men. 
What cry avails me now, what deed of blood, 
Unto this land what dark despite? 
Alack, alack, forlorn 
Are we, a bitter injury have borne! 
Alack, O sisters, O dishonoured brood 
Of mother Night! 

ATHENA Dishonoured are ye not; turn not, I pray, 
As goddesses your swelling wrath on men, 
Nor make the friendly earth despiteful to them. 
I too have Zeus for champion-'tis enough- 
I only of all goddesses do know 
To ope the chamber where his thunderbolts 
Lie stored and sealed; but here is no such need. 
Nay, be appeased, nor cast upon the ground 
The malice of thy tongue, to blast the world; 
Calm thou thy bitter wrath's black inward surge, 
For high shall be thine honour, set beside me 
For ever in this land, whose fertile lap 
Shall pour its teeming firstfruits unto you, 
Gifts for fair childbirth and for wedlock's crown: 
Thus honoured, praise my spoken pledge for aye. 

CHORUS  (chanting) I, I dishonoured in this earth to dwell,-

Ancient of days and wisdom! I breathe forth 
Poison and breath of frenzied ire. O Earth, 
Woe, woe for thee, for me! 
From side to side what pains be these that thrill? 
Hearken, O mother Night, my wrath, mine agony! 
Whom from mine ancient rights the gods have thrust 
And brought me to the dust- 
Woe, woe is me!-with craft invincible. 

ATHENA Older art thou than I, and I will bear 
With this thy fury. Know, although thou be 
More wise in ancient wisdom, yet have 
From Zeus no scanted measure of the same, 
Wherefore take heed unto this prophecy- 
If to another land of alien men 
Ye go, too late shall ye feel longing dreep 
For mine. The rolling tides of time bring round 
A day of brighter glory for this town; 
And thou, enshrined in honour by the halls 
Where dwelt Erechtheus, shalt a worship win 
From men and from the train of womankind, 
Greater than any tribe elsewhere shall pay. 
Cast thou not therefore on this soil of mine 
Whetstones that sharpen souls to bloodshedding, 
The burning goads of youthful hearts, made hot 
With frenzy of the spirit, not of wine. 
Nor pluck as 'twere the heart from cocks that strive, 
To set it in the breast of citizens 
Of mine, a war-god's spirit, keen for fight, 
Made stern against their country and their kin. 
The man who grievously doth lust for fame, 
War, full, immitigable, let him wage 
Against the stranger; but of kindred birds 
I hold the challenge hateful. Such the boon 
I proffer thee-within this land of lands, 
Most loved of gods, with me to show and share 
Fair mercy, gratitude and grace as fair. 

CHORUS  (chanting) I, I dishonoured in this earth to dwell,-

Ancient of days and wisdom! I breathe forth 
Poison and breath of frenzied ire. O Earth, 
Woe, woe for thee, for me! 
From side to side what pains be these that thrill? 
Hearken, O mother Night, my wrath, mine agony! 
Whom from mine ancient rights the gods have thrust 
And brought me to the dust- 
Woe, woe is me!-with craft invincible. 

ATHENA I will not weary of soft words to thee, 
That never mayst thou say, Behold me spurned, 
An elder by a younger deity, 
And from this land rejected and forlorn, 
Unhonoured by the men who dwell therein. 
But, if Persuasion's grace be sacred to thee, 
Soft in the soothing accents of my tongue, 
Tarry, I Dray thee, yet, if go thou wilt. 
Not rightfully wilt thou on this my town 
Sway down the scale that beareth wrath and teen 
Or wasting plague uport this folk. 'Tis thine, 
If so thou wilt, inheritress to be 
Of this my land, its utmost grace to win. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O queen, what refuge dost thou promise me?

ATHENA Refuge untouched by bale: take thou my boon. 

LEADER What, if I take it, shall mine honour be? 

ATHENA No house shall prosper without grace of thine. 

LEADER Canst thou achieve and grant such power to me? 

ATHENA Yea, for my hand shall bless thy worshippers. 

LEADER And wilt thou pledge me this for time eterne? 

ATHENA Yea: none can bid me pledge beyond my power. 

LEADER Lo, I desist from wrath, appeased by thee. 

ATHENA Then in the land's heart shalt thou win thee friends.

LEADER What chant dost bid me raise, to greet the land?

ATHENA Such as aspires towards a victory 
Unrued by any: chants from breast of earth, 
From wave, from sky; and let the wild winds' breath 
Pass with soft sunlight o'er the lap of land,- 
Strong wax the fruits of earth, fair teem the kine, 
Unfailing, for my town's prosperity, 
And constant be the growth of mortal seed. 
But more and more root out the impious, 
For as a gardener fosters what he sows, 
So foster I this race, whom righteousness 
Doth fend from sorrow. Such the proffered boon. 
But I, if wars must be, and their loud clash 
And carnage, for my town, will ne'er endure 
That aught but victory shall crown her fame. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Lo, I accept it; at her very side 
Doth Pallas bid me dwell: 
I will not wrong the city of her pride, 
Which even Almighty Zeus and Ares hold 
Heaven's earthly citadel, 
Loved home of Grecian gods, the young, the old, 
The sanctuary divine, 
The shield of every shrine! 
For Athens I say forth a gracious prophecy,- 
The glory of the sunlight and the skies 
Shall bid from earth arise 
Warm wavelets of new life and glad prosperity. 

ATUENA  (chanting) Behold, with gracious heart well pleased

I for my citizens do grant 
Fulfilment of this covenant: 
And here, their wrath at length appeased, 
These mighty deities shall stay. 
For theirs it is by right to sway 
The lot that rules our mortal day, 
And he who hath not inly felt 
Their stern decree, ere long on him, 
Not knowing why and whence, the grim 
Life-crushing blow is dealt. 
The father's sin upon the child 
Descends, and sin is silent death, 
And leads him on the downward path, 
By stealth beguiled, 
Unto the Furies: though his state 
On earth were high, and loud his boast, 
Victim of silent ire and hate 
He dwells among the Lost. 

CHORUS  (chanting) To my blessing now give ear.- 
Scorching blight nor singed air 
Never blast thine olives fair! 
Drouth, that wasteth bud and plant, 
Keep to thine own place. Avaunt, 
Famine fell, and come not hither 
Stealthily to waste and wither! 
Let the land, in season due, 
Twice her waxing fruits renew; 
Teem the kine in double measure; 
Rich in new god-given treasure; 
Here let men the powers adore 
For sudden gifts unhoped before! 

ATHENA  (chanting) O hearken, warders of the wall 
That guards mine Athens, what a dower 
Is unto her ordained and given! 
For mighty is the Furies' power, 
And deep-revered in courts of heaven 
And realms of hell; and clear to all 
They weave thy doom, mortality! 
And some in joy and peace shall sing; 
But unto other some they bring 
Sad life and tear-dimmed eye. 

CHORUS  (chanting) And far away I ban thee and remove, 
Untimely death of youths too soon brought low! 
And to each maid, O gods, when time is come for love, 
Grant ye a warrior's heart, a wedded life to know. 
Ye too, O Fates, children of mother Night, 
Whose children too are we, O goddesses 
Of just award, of all by sacred right 
Queens, who in time and in eternity 
Do rule, a present power for righteousness, 
Honoured beyond all Gods, hear ye and grant my cry! 

ATHENA  (chanting) And I too, I with joy am fain, 
Hearing your voice this gift ordain 
Unto my land. High thanks be thine, 
Persuasion, who with eyes divine 
Into my tongue didst look thy strength, 
To bend and to appease at length 
Those who would not be comforted. 
Zeus, king of parley, doth prevail, 
And ye and I will strive nor fail, 
That good may stand in evil's stead, 
And lasting bliss for bale. 

CHORUS  (chanting) And nevermore these walls within 
Shall echo fierce sedition's din, 
Unslaked with blood and crime; 
The thirsty dust shall nevermore 
Suck up the darkly streaming gore 
Of civic broils, shed out in wrath 
And vengeance, crying death for death! 
But man with man and state with state 
Shall vow The pledge of common hate 
And common friendship, that for man 
Hath oft made blessing, out of ban, 
Be ours unto all time. 

ATHENA  (chanting) Skill they, or not, the path to find

Of favouring speech and presage kind? 
Yea, even from these, who, grim and stern, 
Glared anger upon you of old, 
O citizens, ye now shall earn 
A recompense right manifold. 
Deck them aright, extol them high, 
Be loyal to their loyalty, 
And ye shall make your town and land 
Sure, propped on justice' saving hand, 
And Fame's eternity. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Hail ye, all hail! and yet again, all hail,

O Athens, happy in a weal secured! 
O ye who sit by Zeus' right hand, nor fail 
Of wisdom set among you and assured, 
Loved of the well-loved Goddess-Maid! the King 
Of gods doth reverence you, beneath her guarding wing. 

ATHENA  (chanting) All hail unto each honoured guest! 
Whom to the chambers of your rest 
'Tis mine to lead, and to provide 
The hallowed torch, the guard and guide. 
Pass down, the while these altars glow 
With sacred fire, to earth below 
And your appointed shrine. 
There dwelling, from the land restrain 
The force of fate, the breath of bane, 
But waft on us the gift and gain 
Of Victory divine! 
And ye, the men of Cranaos' seed, 
I bid you now with reverence lead 
These alien Powers that thus are made 
Athenian evermore. To you 
Fair be their will henceforth, to do 
Whate'er may bless and aid! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Hail to you all! hail yet again, 
All who love Athens, gods and men, 
Adoring her as Pallas' home! 
And while ye reverence what ye grant- 
My sacred shrine and hidden haunt- 
Blameless and blissful be your doom! 

ATHENA Once more I praise the promise of your vows, 
And now I bid the golden torches' glow 
Pass down before you to the hidden depth 
Of earth, by mine own sacred servants borne, 
My loyal guards of statue and of shrine. 
Come forth, O flower of Attic land, 
O glorious band of children and of wives, 
And ye, O train of matrons crowned with eld! 
Deck you with festal robes of scarlet dye 
In honour of this day: O gleaming torch, 
Lead onward, that these gracious powers of earth 
Henceforth be seen to bless the life of men.  (ATHENA leads the procession
downwards into the Cave of the FURIES, now Eumenides, under the Areopagus:
as they go, the escort of women and children chant aloud)

CHANT With loyalty we lead you; proudly go, 
Night's childless children, to your home below! 
O citizens, awhile from words forbear! 
To darkness' deep primeval lair, 
Far in Earth's bosom, downward fare, 
Adored with prayer and sacrifice. 
O citizens, forbear your cries! 
Pass hitherward, ye powers of Dread, 
With all your former wrath allayed, 
Into the heart of this loved land; 
With joy unto your temple wend, 
The while upon your steps attend 
The flames that feed upon the brand- 
Now, now ring out your chant, your joy's acclaim! 
Behind them, as they downward fare, 
Let holy hands libations bear, 
And torches' sacred flame. 
All-seeing Zeus and Fate come down 
To battle fair for Pallas' town! 
Ring out your chant, ring out your joy's acclaim! 

THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the Council-Hall of the Persian Kings at Susa. The tomb of
Darius the Great is visible. The time is 480 B.C., shortly after the
battle of Salamis. The play opens with the CHORUS OF PERSIAN ELDERS
singing its first choral lyric.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

CHORUS While o'er the fields of Greece the embattled troops

Of Persia march with delegated sway, 
We o'er their rich and gold-abounding seats 
Hold faithful our firm guard; to this high charge 
Xerxes, our royal lord, the imperial son 
Of great Darius, chose our honour'd age. 
But for the king's return, and his arm'd host 
Blazing with gold, my soul presaging ill 
Swells in my tortured breast: for all her force 
Hath Asia sent, and for her youth I sigh. 
Nor messenger arrives, nor horseman spurs 
With tidings to this seat of Persia's kings. 
The gates of Susa and Ecbatana 
Pour'd forth their martial trains; and Cissia sees 
Her ancient towers forsaken, while her youth, 
Some on the bounding steed, the tall bark some 
Ascending, some with painful march on foot, 
Haste on, to arrange the deep'ning files of war. 
Amistres, Artaphernes, and the might 
Of great Astaspes, Megabazes bold, 
Chieftains of Persia, kings, that, to the power 
Of the great king obedient, march with these 
Leading their martial thousands; their proud steeds 
Prance under them; steel bows and shafts their arms, 
Dreadful to see, and terrible in fight, 
Deliberate valour breathing in their souls. 
Artembares, that in his fiery horse 
Delights; Masistress; and Imaeus bold, 
Bending with manly strength his stubborn bow; 
Pharandaces, and Sosthanes, that drives 
With military pomp his rapid steeds. 
Others the vast prolific Nile hath sent; 
Pegastagon, that from Aegyptus draws 
His high birth; Susiscanes; and the chief 
That reigns o'er sacred Memphis, great Arsames; 
And Ariomardus, that o'er ancient Thebes 
Bears the supreme dominion; and with these, 
Drawn from their watery marshes, numbers train'd 
To the stout oar. Next these the Lycian troops, 
Soft sons of luxury; and those that dwell 
Amid the inland forests, from the sea 
Far distant; these Metragathes commands, 
And virtuous Arceus, royal chiefs, that shine 
In burnish'd gold, and many a whirling car 
Drawn by six generous steeds from Sardis lead, 
A glorious and a dreadful spectacle. 
And from the foot of Tmolus, sacred mount, 
Eager to bind on Greece the servile yoke, 
Mardon and Tharybis the massy spear 
Grasp with unwearied vigour; the light lance 
The Mysians shake. A mingled multitude 
Swept from her wide dominions skill'd to draw 
The unerring bow, in ships Euphrates sends 
From golden Babylon. With falchions arm'd 
From all the extent of Asia move the hosts 
Obedient to their monarch's stern command. 
Thus march'd the flower of Persia, whose loved youth 
The world of Asia nourish'd, and with sighs 
Laments their absence; many an anxious look 
Their wives, their parents send, count the slow days, 
And tremble at the long-protracted time. 

(strophe 1)

Already o'er the adverse strand 
In arms the monarch's martial squadrons spread; 
The threat'ning ruin shakes the land, 
And each tall city bows its tower'd head. 
Bark bound to bark, their wondrous way 
They bridge across the indignant sea; 
The narrow Hellespont's vex'd waves disdain, 
His proud neck taught to wear the chain. 
Now has the peopled Asia's warlike lord, 
By land, by sea, with foot, with horse, 
Resistless in his rapid course, 
O'er all their realms his warring thousands pour'd; 
Now his intrepid chiefs surveys, 
And glitt'ring like a god his radiant state displays. 

(antistrophe 1)

Fierce as the dragon scaled in gold 
Through the deep files he darts his glowing eye; 
And pleased their order to behold, 
His gorgeous standard blazing to the sky, 
Rolls onward his Assyrian car, 
Directs the thunder of the war, 
Bids the wing'd arrows' iron storm advance 
Against the slow and cumbrous lance. 
What shall withstand the torrent of his sway 
When dreadful o'er the yielding shores 
The impetuous tide of battle roars, 
And sweeps the weak opposing mounds away? 
So Persia, with resistless might, 
Rolls her unnumber'd hosts of heroes to the fight. 

(strophe 2)

For when misfortune's fraudful hand 
Prepares to pour the vengeance of the sky, 
What mortal shall her force withstand? 
What rapid speed the impending fury fly? 
Gentle at first with flatt'ring smiles 
She spreads her soft enchanting wiles, 
So to her toils allures her destined prey, 
Whence man ne'er breaks unhurt away. 
For thus from ancient times the Fates ordain 
That Persia's sons should greatly dare, 
Unequall'd in the works of war; 
Shake with their thund'ring steeds the ensanguined plain,

Dreadful the hostile walls surround, 
And lay their rampired towers in ruins on the ground. 

(antistrophe 2)

Taught to behold with fearless eyes 
The whitening billows foam beneath the gale, 
They bid the naval forests rise, 
Mount the slight bark, unfurl the flying sail, 
And o'er the angry ocean bear 
To distant realms the storm of war. 
For this with many a sad and gloomy thought 
My tortured breast is fraught: 
Ah me! for Persia's absent sons I sigh; 
For while in foreign fields they fight, 
Our towns exposed to wild affright 
An easy prey to the invader lie: 
Where, mighty Susa, where thy powers, 
To wield the warrior's arms, and guard thy regal towers?

(epode)

Crush'd beneath the assailing foe 
Her golden head must Cissia bend; 
While her pale virgins, frantic with despair, 
Through all her streets awake the voice of wo; 
And flying with their bosoms bare, 
Their purfled stoles in anguish rend: 
For all her youth in martial pride, 
Like bees that, clust'ring round their king, 
Their dark imbodied squadrons bring, 
Attend their sceptred monarch's side, 
And stretch across the watery way 
From shore to shore their long array. 
The Persian dames, with many a tender fear, 
In grief's sad vigils keep the midnight hour; 
Shed on the widow'd couch the streaming tear, 
And the long absence of their loves deplore. 
Each lonely matron feels her pensive breast 
Throb with desire, with aching fondness glow, 
Since in bright arms her daring warrior dress'd 
Left her to languish in her love-lorn wo. 

Now, ye grave Persians, that your honour'd seats 
Hold in this ancient house, with prudent care 
And deep deliberation, so the state 
Requires, consult we, pond'ring the event 
Of this great war, which our imperial lord, 
The mighty Xerxes from Darius sprung, 
The stream of whose rich blood flows in our veins, 
Leads against Greece; whether his arrowy shower 
Shot from the strong-braced bow, or the huge spear 
High brandish'd, in the deathful field prevails. 
But see, the monarch's mother: like the gods 
Her lustre blazes on our eyes: my queen, 
Prostrate I fall before her: all advance 
With reverence, and in duteous phrase address her,  (ATOSSA enters
with her retinue. The Elders do their obeisance to her.)

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Hail, queen, of Persia's high-zoned dames supreme,

Age-honour'd mother of the potent Xerxes, 
Imperial consort of Darius, hail! 
The wife, the mother of the Persians' god, 
If yet our former glories fade not from us. 

ATOSSA And therefore am I come, leaving my house 
That shines with gorgeous ornaments and gold, 
Where in past days Darius held with me 
His royal residence. With anxious care 
My heart is tortured: I will tell you, friends, 
My thoughts, not otherwise devoid of fear, 
Lest mighty wealth with haughty foot o'erturn 
And trample in the dust that happiness, 
Which, not unbless'd by Heaven, Darius raised. 
For this with double force unquiet thoughts 
Past utterance fill my soul; that neither wealth 
With all its golden stores, where men are wanting, 
Claims reverence; nor the light, that beams from power, 
Shines on the man whom wealth disdains to grace. 
The golden stores of wealth indeed are ours; 
But for the light (such in the house I deem 
The presence of its lord) there I have fears. 
Advise me then, you whose experienced age 
Supports the state of Persia: prudence guides 
Your councils, always kind and faithful to me. 

LEADER Speak, royal lady, what thy will, assured 
We want no second bidding, where our power 
In word or deed waits on our zeal: our hearts 
In this with honest duty shall obey thee. 

ATOSSA Oft, since my son hath march'd his mighty host 
Against the lonians, warring to subdue 
Their country, have my slumbers been disturb'd 
With dreams of dread portent; but most last night, 
With marks of plainest proof. I'll tell thee then: 
Alethought two women stood before my eyes 
Gorgeously vested, one in Persian robes 
Adorn'd, the other in the Doric garb. 
With more than mortal majesty they moved, 
Of peerless beauty; sisters too they seem'd, 
Though distant each from each they chanced to dwell, 
In Greece the one, on the barbaric coast 
The other. 'Twixt them soon dissension rose: 
My son then hasted to compose their strife, 
Soothed them to fair accord, beneath his car 
Yokes them, and reins their harness'd necks. The one, 
Exulting in her rich array, with pride 
Arching her stately neck, obey'd the reins; 
The other with indignant fury spurn'd 
The car, and dash'd it piecemeal, rent the reins, 
And tore the yoke asunder; down my son 
Fell from the seat, and instant at his side 
His father stands, Darius, at his fall 
Impress'd with pity: him when Xerxes saw, 
Glowing with grief and shame he rends his robes. 
This was the dreadful vision of the night. 
When I arose, in the sweet-flowing stream 
I bathed my hands, and on the incensed altars 
Presenting my oblations to the gods 
To avert these ills, an eagle I behold 
Fly to the altar of the sun; aghast 
I stood, my friends, and speechless; when a hawk 
With eager speed runs thither, furious cuffs 
The eagle with his wings, and with his talons 
Unplumes his head; meantime the imperial bird 
Cowers to the blows defenceless. Dreadful this 
To me that saw it, and to you that hear. 
My son, let conquest crown his arms, would shine 
With dazzling glory; but should Fortune frown, 
The state indeed presumes not to arraign 
His sovereignty; yet how, his honour lost, 
How shall he sway the sceptre of this land? 

LEADER We would not, royal lady, sink thy soul 
With fear in the excess, nor raise it high 
With confidence. Go then, address the gods; 
If thou hast seen aught ill, entreat their power 
To avert that ill, and perfect ev'ry good 
To thee, thy sons, the state, and all thy friends. 
Then to the earth, and to the mighty dead 
Behooves thee pour libations; gently cal 
Him that was once thy husband, whom thou saw'st 
In visions of the night; entreat his shade 
From the deep realms beneath to send to light 
Triumph to thee and to thy son; whate'er 
Bears other import, to inwrap, to hide it 
Close in the covering earth's profoundest gloom. 
This, in the presage of my thoughts that flow 
Benevolent to thee, have I proposed; 
And all, we trust, shall be successful to thee. 

ATOSSA Thy friendly judgment first hath placed these dreams

In a fair light, confirming the event 
Benevolent to my son and to my house. 
May all the good be ratified! These rites 
Shall, at thy bidding, to the powers of heaven, 
And to the manes of our friends, be paid 
In order meet, when I return; meanwhile 
Indulge me, friends, who wish to be inform'd 
Where, in what clime, the towers of Athens rise. 

LEADER Far in the west, where sets the imperial sun. 

ATOSSA Yet my son will'd the conquest of this town. 

LEADER May Greece through all her states bend to his power!

ATOSSA Send they embattled numbers to the field? 

LEADER A force that to the Medes hath wrought much wo. 

ATOSSA Have they sufficient treasures in their houses? 

LEADER Their rich earth yields a copious fount of silver.

ATOSSA From the strong bow wing they the barbed shaft? 

LEADER They grasp the stout spear, and the massy shield.

ATOSSA What monarch reigns, whose power commands their ranks?

LEADER Slaves to no lord, they own no kingly power. 

ATOSSA How can they then resist the invading foe? 

LEADER As to spread havoc through the numerous host, 
That round Darius form'd their glitt'ring files. 

ATOSSA Thy words strike deep, and wound the parent's breast

Whose sons are march'd to such a dangerous field. 

LEADER But, if I judge aright, thou soon shalt hear 
Each circumstance; for this way, mark him, speeds 
A Persian messenger; he bears, be sure, 
Tidings of high import, or good or ill.  (A MESSENGER enters.)

MESSENGER Wo to the towns through Asia's peopled realms!

Wo to the land of Persia, once the port 
Of boundless wealth, how is thy glorious state 
Vanish'd at once, and all thy spreading honours 
Fall'n, lost! Ah me! unhappy is his task 
That bears unhappy tidings: but constraint 
Compels me to relate this tale of wo. 
Persians, the whole barbaric host is fall'n. 

CHORUS  (chanting) O horror, horror! What a baleful train

Of recent ills! Ah, Persians, as he speaks 
Of ruin, let your tears stream to the earth. 

MESSENGER It is ev'n so, all ruin; and myself, 
Beyond all hope returning, view this light. 

CHORUS  (chanting) How tedious and oppressive is the weight

Of age, reserved to hear these hopeless ills! 

MESSENGER I speak not from report; but these mine eyes 
Beheld the ruin which my tongue would utter. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Wo, wo is me! Then has the iron storm,

That darken'd from the realms of Asia, pour'd 
In vain its arrowy shower on sacred Greece. 

MESSENGER In heaps the unhappy dead lie on the strand 
Of Salamis, and all the neighbouring shores. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Unhappy friends, sunk, perish'd in the sea;

Their bodies, mid the wreck of shatter'd ships, 
Mangled, and rolling on the encumber'd waves! 

MESSENGER Naught did their bows avail, but all the troops

In the first conflict of the ships were lost. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Raise the funereal cry, with dismal notes

Wailing the wretched Persians. Oh, how ill 
They plann'd their measures, all their army perish'd! 

MESSENGER O Salamis, how hateful is thy name! 
And groans burst from me when I think of Athens. 

CHORUS  (chanting) How dreadful to her foes! Call to remembrance

How many Persian dames, wedded in vain, 
Hath Athens of their noble husbands widow'd? 

ATOSSA Astonied with these ills, my voice thus long 
Hath wanted utterance: griefs like these exceed 
The power of speech or question: yet ev'n such, 
Inflicted by the gods, must mortal man 
Constrain'd by hard necessity endure. 
But tell me all, without distraction tell me, 
All this calamity, though many a groan 
Burst from thy labouring heart. Who is not fallen? 
What leader must we wail? What sceptred chief 
Dying hath left his troops without a lord? 

MESSENGER Xerxes himself lives, and beholds the light. 

ATOSSA That word beams comfort on my house, a ray 
That brightens through the melancholy gloom. 

MESSENGER Artembares, the potent chief that led 
Ten thousand horse, lies slaughtered on the rocks 
Of rough Sileniae. The great Dadaces, 
Beneath whose standard march'd a thousand horse, 
Pierced by a spear, fell headlong from the ship. 
Tenagon, bravest of the Bactrians, lies 
Roll'd on the wave-worn beach of Ajax' isle. 
Lilaeus, Arsames, Argestes, dash 
With violence in death against the rocks 
Where nest the silver doves. Arcteus, that dwelt 
Near to the fountains of the Egyptian Nile, 
Adeues, and Pheresba, and Pharnuchus 
Fell from one ship. Matallus, Chrysa's chief, 
That led his dark'ning squadrons, thrice ten thousand, 
On jet-black steeds, with purple gore distain'd 
The yellow of his thick and shaggy beard. 
The Magian Arabus, and Artames 
From Bactra, mould'ring on the dreary shore 
Lie low. Amistris, and Amphistreus there 
Grasps his war-wear spear; there prostrate lies 
The illustrious Ariomardus; long his los 
Shall Sardis weep: thy Mysian Sisames, 
And Tharybis, that o'er the burden'd deep 
Led five times fifty vessels; Lerna gave 
The hero birth, and manly race adorn'd 
His pleasing form, but low in death he lies 
Unhappy in his fate. Syennesis, 
Cilicia's warlike chief, who dared to front 
The foremost dangers, singly to the foes 
A terror, there too found a glorious death. 
These chieftains to my sad remembrance rise, 
Relating but a few of many ills. 

ATOSSA This is the height of ill, ah me! and shame 
To Persia, grief, and lamentation loud. 
But tell me this, afresh renew thy tale: 
What was the number of the Grecian fleet, 
That in fierce conflict their bold barks should dare 
Rush to encounter with the Persian hosts. 

MESSENGER Know then, in numbers the barbaric fleet 
Was far superior: in ten squadrons, each 
Of thirty ships, Greece plough'd the deep; of these 
One held a distant station. Xerxes led 
A thousand ships; their number well I know; 
Two hundred more, and seven, that swept the seas 
With speediest sail: this was their full amount. 
And in the engagement seem'd we not secure 
Of victory? But unequal fortune sunk 
Our scale in fight, discomfiting our host. 

ATOSSA The gods preserve the city of Minerva. 

MESSENGER The walls of Athens are impregnable, 
Their firmest bulwarks her heroic sons. 

ATOSSA Which navy first advanced to the attack? 
Who led to the onset, tell me; the bold Greeks, 
Or, glorying in his numerous fleet, my son? 

MESSENGER Our evil genius, lady, or some god 
Hostile to Persia, led to ev'ry ill. 
Forth from the troops of Athens came a Greek, 
And thus address'd thy son, the imperial Xerxes:- 
"Soon as the shades of night descend, the Grecians 
Shall quit their station; rushing to their oars 
They mean to separate, and in secret flight 
Seek safety." At these words, the royal chief, 
Little conceiving of the wiles of Greece 
And gods averse, to all the naval leaders 
Gave his high charge:-"Soon as yon sun shall cease 
To dart his radiant beams, and dark'ning night 
Ascends the temple of the sky, arrange 
In three divisions your well-ordered ships, 
And guard each pass, each outlet of the seas: 
Others enring around this rocky isle 
Of Salamis. Should Greece escape her fate, 
And work her way by secret flight, your heads 
Shall answer the neglect." This harsh command 
He gave, exulting in his mind, nor knew 
What Fate design'd. With martial discipline 
And prompt obedience, snatching a repast, 
Each mariner fix'd well his ready oar. 
Soon as the golden sun was set, and night 
Advanced, each train'd to ply the dashing oar, 
Assumed his seat; in arms each warrior stood, 
Troop cheering troop through all the ships of war. 
Each to the appointed station steers his course; 
And through the night his naval force each chief 
Fix'd to secure the passes. Night advanced, 
But not by secret flight did Greece attempt 
To escape. The morn, all beauteous to behold, 
Drawn by white steeds bounds o'er the enlighten'd earth;

At once from ev'ry Greek with glad acclaim 
Burst forth the song of war, whose lofty notes 
The echo of the island rocks return'd, 
Spreading dismay through Persia's hosts, thus fallen 
From their high hopes; no flight this solemn strain 
Portended, but deliberate valour bent 
On daring battle; while the trumpet's sound 
Kindled the flames of war. But when their oars 
The paean ended, with impetuous force 
Dash'd the resounding surges, instant all 
Rush'd on in view: in orderly array 
The squadron on the right first led, behind 
Rode their whole fleet; and now distinct we heard 
From ev'ry part this voice of exhortation:- 
"Advance, ye sons of Greece, from thraldom save 
Your country, save your wives, your children save, 
The temples of your gods, the sacred tomb 
Where rest your honour'd ancestors; this day 
The common cause of all demands your valour." 
Meantime from Persia's hosts the deep'ning shout 
Answer'd their shout; no time for cold delay; 
But ship 'gainst ship its brazen beak impell'd. 
First to the charge a Grecian galley rush'd; 
Ill the Phoenician bore the rough attack, 
Its sculptured prow all shatter'd. Each advanced 
Daring an opposite. The deep array 
Of Persia at the first sustain'd the encounter; 
But their throng'd numbers, in the narrow seas 
Confined, want room for action; and, deprived 
Of mutual aid, beaks clash with beaks, and each 
Breaks all the other's oars: with skill disposed 
The Grecian navy circled them around 
With fierce assault; and rushing from its height 
The inverted vessel sinks: the sea no more 
Wears its accustomed aspect, with foul wrecks 
And blood disfigured; floating carcasses 
Roll on the rocky shores: the poor remains 
Of the barbaric armament to flight 
Ply every oar inglorious: onward rush 
The Greeks amid the ruins of the fleet, 
As through a shoal of fish caught in the net, 
Spreading destruction: the wide ocean o'er 
Wailings are heard, and loud laments, till night 
With darkness on her brow brought grateful truce. 
Should I recount each circumstance of wo, 
Ten times on my unfinished tale the sun 
Would set; for be assured that not one day 
Could close the ruin of so vast a host. 

ATOSSA Ah, what a boundless sea of wo hath burst 
On Persia, and the whole barbaric race! 

MESSENGER These are not half, not half our ills; on these

Came an assemblage of calamities, 
That sunk us with a double weight of wo. 

ATOSSA What fortune can be more unfriendly to us 
Than this? Say on, what dread calamity 
Sunk Persia's host with greater weight of wo. 

MESSENGER Whoe'er of Persia's warriors glow'd in prime 
Of vig'rous youth, or felt their generous souls 
Expand with courage, or for noble birth 
Shone with distinguish'd lustre, or excell'd 
In firm and duteous loyalty, all these 
Are fall'n, ignobly, miserably fall'n. 

ATOSSA Alas, their ruthless fate, unhappy friends! 
But in what manner, tell me, did they perish? 

MESSENGER Full against Salamis an isle arises, 
Of small circumference, to the anchor'd bark 
Unfaithful; on the promontory's brow, 
That overlooks the sea, Pan loves to lead 
The dance: to this the monarch sends these chiefs, 
That when the Grecians from their shatter'd ships 
Should here seek shelter, these might hew them down 
An easy conquest, and secure the strand 
To their sea-wearied friends; ill judging what 
The event: but when the fav'ring god to Greece 
Gave the proud glory of this naval fight, 
Instant in all their glitt'ring arms they leap'd 
From their light ships, and all the island round 
Encompass'd, that our bravest stood dismay'd; 
While broken rocks, whirl'd with tempestuous force, 
And storms of arrows crush'd them; then the Greeks 
Rush to the attack at once, and furious spread 
The carnage, till each mangled Persian fell. 
Deep were the groans of Xerxes when he saw 
This havoc; for his seat, a lofty mound 
Commanding the wide sea, o'erlook'd his hosts. 
With rueful cries he rent his royal robes, 
And through his troops embattled on the shore 
Gave signal of retreat; then started wild, 
And fled disorder'd. To the former ills 
These are fresh miseries to awake thy sighs. 

ATOSSA Invidious Fortune, how thy baleful power 
Hath sunk the hopes of Persia! Bitter fruit 
My son hath tasted from his purposed vengeance 
On Athens, famed for arms; the fatal field 
Of Marathon, red with barbaric blood, 
Sufficed not; that defeat he thought to avenge, 
And pull'd this hideous ruin on his head. 
But tell me, if thou canst, where didst thou leave 
The ships that happily escaped the wreck? 

MESSENGER The poor remains of Persia's scatter'd fleet 
Spread ev'ry sail for flight, as the wind drives, 
In wild disorder; and on land no less 
The ruin'd army; in Boeotia some, 
With thirst oppress'd, at Crene's cheerful rills 
Were lost; forespent with breathless speed some pass 
The fields of Phocis, some the Doric plain, 
And near the gulf of Melia, the rich vale 
Through which Sperchius rolls his friendly stream. 
Achaea thence and the Thessalian state 
Received our famish'd train; the greater part 
Through thirst and hunger perish'd there, oppress'd 
At once by both: but we our painful steps 
Held onwards to Magnesia, and the land 
Of Macedonia, o'er the ford of Axius, 
And Bolbe's sedgy marshes, and the heights 
Of steep Pangaeos, to the realms of Thrace. 
That night, ere yet the season, breathing frore, 
Rush'd winter, and with ice incrusted o'er 
The flood of sacred Strymon: such as own'd 
No god till now, awe-struck, with many a prayer 
Adored the earth and sky. When now the troops 
Had ceased their invocations to the gods, 
O'er the stream's solid crystal they began 
Their march; and we, who took our early way, 
Ere the sun darted his warm beams, pass'd safe: 
But when this burning orb with fiery rays 
Unbound the middle current, down they sunk 
Each over other; happiest he who found 
The speediest death: the poor remains, that 'scaped, 
With pain through Thrace dragg'd on their toilsome march,

A feeble few, and reach'd their native soil; 
That Persia sighs through all her states, and mourns 
Her dearest youth. This is no feigned tale: 
But many of the ills, that burst upon us 
In dreadful vengeance, I refrain to utter.  (The MESSENGER withdraws.)

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O Fortune, heavy with affliction's load,

How bath thy foot crush'd all the Persian race! 

ATOSSA Ah me, what sorrows for our ruin'd host 
Oppress my soul! Ye visions of the night 
Haunting my dreams, how plainly did you show 
These ills!-You set them in too fair a light. 
Yet, since your bidding hath in this prevail'd, 
First to the gods wish I to pour my prayers, 
Then to the mighty dead present my off 'rings, 
Bringing libations from my house: too late, 
I know, to change the past; yet for the future, 
If haply better fortune may await it, 
Behooves you, on this sad event, to guide 
Your friends with faithful counsels. Should my son 
Return ere I have finish'd, let your voice 
Speak comfort to him; friendly to his house 
Attend him, nor let sorrow rise on sorrows.  (ATOSSA and her retinue
go out.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Awful sovereign of the skies, 
When now o'er Persia's numerous host 
Thou badest the storm with ruin rise, 
All her proud vaunts of glory lost, 
Ecbatana's imperial head 
By thee was wrapp'd in sorrow's dark'ning shade; 
Through Susa's palaces with loud lament, 
By their soft hands their veils all rent, 
The copious tear the virgins pour, 
That trickles their bare bosoms o'er. 
From her sweet couch up starts the widow'd bride, 
Her lord's loved image rushing on her soul, 
Throws the rich ornaments of youth aside, 
And gives her griefs to flow without control: 
Her griefs not causeless; for the mighty slain 
Our melting tears demand, and sorrow-soften'd strain. 

(antistrophe)

Now her wailings wide despair 
Pours these exhausted regions o'er: 
Xerxes, ill-fated, led the war; 
Xerxes, ill-fated, leads no more; 
Xerxes sent forth the unwise command, 
The crowded ships unpeopled all the land; 
That land, o'er which Darius held his reign, 
Courting the arts of peace, in vain, 
O'er all his grateful realms adored, 
The stately Susa's gentle lord. 
Black o'er the waves his burden'd vessels sweep, 
For Greece elate the warlike squadrons fly; 
Now crush'd, and whelm'd beneath the indignant deep 
The shatter'd wrecks and lifeless heroes lie: 
While, from the arms of Greece escaped, with toil 
The unshelter'd monarch roams o'er Thracia's dreary soil.

(epode)

The first in battle slain 
By Cychrea's craggy shore 
Through sad constraint, ah me! forsaken lie, 
All pale and smear'd with gore:- 
Raise high the mournful strain, 
And let the voice of anguish pierce the sky:- 
Or roll beneath the roaring tide, 
By monsters rent of touch abhorr'd; 
While through the widow'd mansion echoing wide 
Sounds the deep groan, and wails its slaughter'd lord: 
Pale with his fears the helpless orphan there 
Gives the full stream of plaintive grief to flow; 
While age its hoary head in deep despair 
Bends; list'ning to the shrieks of wo. 
With sacred awe 
The Persian law 
No more shall Asia's realms revere; 
To their lord's hand 
At his command, 
No more the exacted tribute bear. 
Who now falls prostrate at the monarch's throne? 
His regal greatness is no more. 
Now no restraint the wanton tongue shall own, 
Free from the golden curb of power; 
For on the rocks, wash'd by the beating flood, 
His awe commanding nobles lie in blood.  (ATOSSA returns, clad in
the garb of mourning; she carries offerings for the tomb of Darius.)

ATOSSA Whoe'er, my friends, in the rough stream of life

Hath struggled with affliction, thence is taught 
That, when the flood begins to swell, the heart 
Fondly fears all things; when the fav'ring gale 
Of Fortune smooths the current, it expands 
With unsuspecting confidence, and deems 
That gale shall always breathe. So to my eyes 
All things now wear a formidable shape, 
And threaten from the gods: my ears are pierced 
With sounds far other than of song. Such ills 
Dismay my sick'ning soul: hence from my house 
Nor glitt'ring car attends me, nor the train 
Of wonted state, while I return, and bear 
Libations soothing to the father's shade 
In the son's cause; delicious milk, that foams 
White from the sacred heifer; liquid honey, 
Extract of flowers; and from its virgin fount 
The running crystal; this pure draught, that flow'd 
From the ancient vine, of power to bathe the spirits 
In joy; the yellow olive's fragrant fruit, 
That glories in its leaves' unfading verdure; 
With flowers of various hues, earth's fairest offspring 
Inwreathed. But you, my friends, amid these rites 
Raise high your solemn warblings, and invoke 
Your lord, divine Darius; I meanwhile 
Will pour these off'rings to the infernal gods. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Yes, royal lady, Persia's honour'd grace,

To earth's dark chambers pour thy off'rings: we 
With choral hymns will supplicate the powers 
That guide the dead, to be propitious to us. 
And you, that o'er the realms of night extend 
Your sacred sway, thee mighty earth, and the 
Hermes; thee chief, tremendous king, whose throne 
Awes with supreme dominion, I adjure: 
Send, from your gloomy regions, send his shade 
Once more to visit this ethereal light; 
That he alone, if aught of dread event 
He sees yet threat'ning Persia, may disclose 
To us poor mortals Fate's extreme decree. 

Hears the honour'd godlike king? 
These barbaric notes of wo, 
Taught in descant sad to ring, 
Hears he in the shades below? 
Thou, O Earth, and you, that lead 
Through your sable realms the dead, 
Guide him as he takes his way, 
And give him to the ethereal light of day! 

Let the illustrious shade arise 
Glorious in his radiant state, 
More than blazed before our eyes, 
Ere sad Susa mourn'd his fate. 
Dear he lived, his tomb is dear, 
Shrining virtues we revere: 
Send then, monarch of the dead, 
Such as Darius was, Darius' shade. 

He in realm-unpeopling war 
Wasted not his subjects' blood, 
Godlike in his will to spare, 
In his councils wise and good. 
Rise then, sovereign lord, to light; 
On this mound's sepulchral height 
Lift thy sock in saffron died, 
And rear thy rich tiara's regal pride! 

Great and good, Darius, rise:  (Lord of Persia's lord, appear:)  Thus
involved with thrilling cries 
Come, our tale of sorrow hear! 
War her Stygian pennons spreads, 
Brooding darkness o'er our heads; 
For stretch'd along the dreary shore 
The flow'r of Asia lies distain'd with gore. 

Rise, Darius, awful power; 
Long for thee our tears shall flow. 
Why thy ruin'd empire o'er 
Swells this double flood of wo? 
Sweeping o'er the azure tide 
Rode thy navy's gallant pride: 
Navy now no more, for all 
Beneath the whelming wave-  (While the CHORUS Sings, ATOSSA performs
her ritual by the tomb. As the song concludes the GHOST OF DARIUS
appears from the tomb.)  

GHOST OF DARIUS Ye faithful Persians, honour'd now in age,

Once the companions of my youth, what ills 
Afflict the state? The firm earth groans, it opes, 
Disclosing its vast deeps; and near my tomb 
I see my wife: this shakes my troubled soul 
With fearful apprehensions; yet her off'rings 
Pleased I receive. And you around my tomb 
Chanting the lofty strain, whose solemn air 
Draws forth the dead, with grief-attemper'd notes 
Mournfully call me: not with ease the way 
Leads to this upper air; and the stern gods, 
Prompt to admit, yield not a passage back 
But with reluctance: much with them my power 
Availing, with no tardy step I come. 
Say then, with what new ill doth Persia groan? 

CHORUS  (chanting) My wonted awe o'ercomes me; in thy presence

I dare not raise my eyes, I dare not speak. 

GHOST OF DARIUS Since from the realms below, by thy sad strains

Adjured, I come, speak; let thy words be brief; 
Say whence thy grief, tell me unawed by fear. 
I dread to forge a flattering tale, I dread 
To grieve thee with a harsh offensive truth. 

GHOST OF DARIUS Since fear hath chained his tongue, high-honour'd
dame, 
Once my imperial consort, check thy tears, 
Thy griefs, and speak distinctly. Mortal man 
Must bear his lot of wo; afflictions rise 
Many from sea, many from land, if life 
Be haply measured through a lengthen'd course. 

ATOSSA O thou that graced with Fortune's choicest gifts

Surpassing mortals, while thine eye beheld 
Yon sun's ethereal rays, lived'st like a god 
Bless'd amid thy Persians; bless'd I deem thee now 
In death, ere sunk in this abyss of ills, 
Darius, hear at once our sum of wo; 
Ruin through all her states hath crush'd thy Persia. 

GHOST OF DARIUS By pestilence, or faction's furious storms?

ATOSSA Not so: near Athens perish'd all our troops. 

GHOST OF DARIUS Say, of my sons, which led the forces thither?

ATOSSA The impetuous Xerxes, thinning all the land. 

GHOST OF DARIUS By sea or land dared he this rash attempt?

ATOSSA By both: a double front the war presented. 

GHOST OF DARIUS A host so vast what march conducted o'er?

ATOSSA From shore to shore he bridged the Hellespont. 

GHOST OF DARIUS What! could he chain the mighty Bosphorus?

ATOSSA Ev'n so, some god assisting his design. 

GHOST OF DARIUS Some god of power to cloud his better sense.

ATOSSA The event now shows what mischiefs he achieved. 

GHOST OF DARIUS What suffer'd they, for whom your sorrows flow?

ATOSSA His navy sunk spreads ruin through the camp. 

GHOST OF DARIUS Fell all his host beneath the slaught'ring spear?

ATOSSA Susa, through all her streets, mourns her lost sons.

GHOST OF DARIUS How vain the succour, the defence of arms?

ATOSSA In Bactra age and grief are only left. 

GHOST OF DARIUS Ah, what a train of warlike youth is lost!

ATOSSA Xerxes, astonished, desolate, alone- 

GHOST OF DARIUS How will this end? Nay, pause not. Is he safe?

ATOSSA Fled o'er the bridge, that join'd the adverse strands.

GHOST OF DARIUS And reach'd this shore in safety? Is this true?

ATOSSA True are thy words, and not to be gainsay'd. 

GHOST OF DARIUS With what a winged course the oracles 
Haste their completion! With the lightning's speed 
Jove on my son hath hurled his threaten'd vengeance: 
Yet I implored the gods that it might fall 
In time's late process: but when rashness drives 
Impetuous on, the scourge of Heaven upraised 
Lashes the Fury forward; hence these ills 
Pour headlong on my friends. Not weighing this, 
My son, with all the fiery pride of youth, 
Hath quickened their arrival, while he hoped 
To bind the sacred Hellespont, to hold 
The raging Bosphorus, like a slave, in chains, 
And dared the advent'rous passage, bridging firm 
With links of solid iron his wondrous way, 
To lead his numerous host; and swell'd with thoughts 
Presumptuous, deem'd, vain mortal! that his power 
Should rise above the gods, and Neptune's might. 
And was riot this the phrensy of the soul? 
But much I fear lest all my treasured wealth 
Fall to some daring hand an easy prey. 

ATOSSA This from too frequent converse with bad men 
The impetuous Xerxes learn'd; these caught his ear 
With thy great deeds, as winning for thy sons 
Vast riches with thy conquering spear, while he 
Tim'rous and slothful, never, save in sport, 
Lifted his lance, nor added to the wealth 
Won by his noble fathers. This reproach 
Oft by bad men repeated, urged his soul 
To attempt this war, and lead his troops to Greece. 

GHOST OF DARIUS Great deeds have they achieved, and memorable

For ages: never hath this wasted state 
Suffer'd such ruin, since heaven's awful king 
Gave to one lord Asia's extended plains 
White with innumerous flocks, and to his hands 
Consign'd the imperial sceptre. Her brave hosts 
A Mede first led; the virtues of his son 
Fix'd firm the empire, for his temperate soul 
Breathed prudence. Cyrus next, by fortune graced, 
Adorn'd the throne, and bless'd his grateful friends 
With peace: he to his mighty monarchy 
Join'd Lydia, and the Phrygians; to his power 
Ionia bent reluctant; but the gods 
His son then wore the regal diadem. 
With victory his gentle virtues crown'd 
His son then wore the regal diadem. 
Next to disgrace his country, and to stain 
The splendid glories of this ancient throne, 
Rose Mardus: him, with righteous vengeance fired 
Artaphernes, and his confederate chiefs 
Crush'd in his palace: Maraphis assumed 
The sceptre: after him Artaphernes. 
Me next to this exalted eminence, 
Crowning my great ambition, Fortune raised. 
In many a glorious field my glittering spear 
Flamed in the van of Persia's numerous hosts; 
But never wrought such ruin to the state. 
Xerxes, my son, in all the pride of youth 
Listens to youthful counsels, my commands 
No more remember'd; hence, my hoary friends, 
Not the whole line of Persia's sceptred lords, 
You know it well, so wasted her brave sons. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Why this? To what fair end are these thy words

Directed? Sovereign lord, instruct thy Persians 
How, mid this ruin, best to guide their state. 

GHOST OF DARIUS No more 'gainst Greece lead your embattled hosts;

Not though your deep'ning phalanx spreads the field 
Outnumb'ring theirs: their very earth fights for them. 

LEADER What may thy words import? How fight for them? 

GHOST OF DARIUS With famine it destroys your cumbrous train.

LEADER Choice levies, prompt for action, will we send, 

GHOST OF DARIUS Those, in the fields of Greece that now remain,

Shall not revisit safe the Persian shore. 

LEADER What! shall not all the host of Persia pass 
Again from Europe o'er the Hellespont? 

GHOST OF DARIUS Of all their numbers few, if aught avails

The faith of heaven-sent oracles to him 
That weighs the past, in their accomplishment 
Not partial: hence he left, in faithless hope 
Confiding, his selected train of heroes. 
These have their station where Asopus flows 
Wat'ring the plain, whose grateful currents roll 
Diffusing plenty through Boeotia's fields. 
There misery waits to crush them with the load 
Of heaviest ills, in vengeance for their proud 
And impious daring; for where'er they held 
Through Greece their march, they fear'd not to profane 
The statues of the gods; their hallow'd shrines 
Emblazed, o'erturn'd their altars, and in ruins, 
Rent from their firm foundations, to the ground 
Levell'd their temples; such their frantic deeds, 
Nor less their suff'rings; greater still await them; 
For Vengeance hath not wasted all her stores; 
The heap yet swells; for in Plataea's plains 
Beneath the Doric spear the clotted mas 
Of carnage shall arise, that the high mounds, 
Piled o'er the dead, to late posterity 
Shall give this silent record to men's eyes, 
That proud aspiring thoughts but ill beseem 
Weak mortals: for oppression, when it springs, 
Puts forth the blade of vengeance, and its fruit 
Yields a ripe harvest of repentant wo. 
Behold this vengeance, and remember Greece, 
Remember Athens: henceforth let not pride, 
Her present state disdaining, strive to grasp 
Another's, and her treasured happiness 
Shed on the ground: such insolent attempts 
Awake the vengeance of offended Jove. 
But you, whose age demands more temperate thoughts, 
With words of well-placed counsel teach his youth 
To curb that pride, which from the gods calls down 
Destruction on his head.  (To ATOSSA)  And thou, whose age

The miseries of thy Xerxes sink with sorrow, 
Go to thy house, thence choose the richest robe, 
And meet thy son; for through the rage of grief 
His gorgeous vestments from his royal limbs 
Are foully rent. With gentlest courtesy 
Soothe his affliction; for is duteous ear, 
I know, will listen to thy voice alone. 
Now to the realms of darkness I descend. 
My ancient friends, farewell, and mid these ills 
Each day in pleasures battle your drooping spirits, 
For treasured riches naught avail the dead.  (The GHOST OF DARIUS
vanishes into the tomb.)  

LEADER These many present, many future ills 
Denounced on Persia, sink my soul with grief. 

ATOSSA Unhappy fortune, what a tide of ills 
Bursts o'er me! Chief this foul disgrace, which shows 
My son divested of his rich attire, 
His royal robes all rent, distracts my thoughts. 
But I will go, choose the most gorgeous vest, 
And liaste to meet my son. Ne'er in his woes 
Will I forsake whom my soul holds most dear.  (ATOSSA departs as the
CHORUS begins its song.)  

CHORUS (strophe 1)

Ye powers that rule the skies, 
Memory recalls our great, our happy fate, 
Our well-appointed state, 
The scenes of glory opening to our eyes, 
When this vast empire o'er 
The good Darius, with each virtue bless'd 
That forms a monarch's breast, 
Shielding his subjects with a father's care 
Invincible in war, 
Extended like a god his awful power, 
Then spread our arms their glory wide, 
Guarding to peace her golden reign: 
Each tower'd city saw with pride 
Safe from the toils of war her homeward-marching train. 

(antistrophe 1)

Nor Haly's shallow strand 
He pass'd, nor from his palace moved his state; 
He spoke; his word was Fate. 
What strong-based cities could his might withstand? 
Not those that lift their heads 
Where to the sea the floods of Strymon pass, 
Leaving the huts of Thrace; 
Nor those, that far the extended ocean o'er 
Stand girt with many a tower; 
Nor where the Hellespont his broad wave spreads; 
Nor the firm bastions' rampired might, 
Whose foot the deep Propontis laves; 
Nor those, that glorying in their height 
Frown o'er the Pontic sea, and shade his darken'd waves.

(strophe 2)

Each sea-girt isle around 
Bow'd to this monarch: humbled Lesbos bow'd; 
Paros, of its marble proud; 
Naxos with vines, with olives Samos crown'd: 
Him Myconos adored; 
Chios, the seat of beauty; Andros steep, 
That stretches o'er the deep 
To meet the wat'ry Tenos; him each bay 
Bound by the Icarian sea, 
Him Melos, Gnidus, Rhodes confess'd their lord; 
O'er Cyprus stretch'd his sceptred hand: 
Paphos and Solos own'd his power, 
And Salamis, whose hostile strand, 
The cause of all our wo, is red with Persian gore. 

(antistrophe 2)

Ev'n the proud towns, that rear'd 
Sublime along the lonian coast their towers, 
Where wealth her treasures pours, 
Peopled from Greece, his prudent reign revered. 
With such unconquer'd might 
His hardy warriors shook the embattled fields, 
Heroes that Persia yields, 
And those from distant realms that took their way, 
And wedged in close array 
Beneath his glitt'ring banners claim'd the fight. 
But now these glories are no more: 
Farewell the big war's plumed pride: 
The gods have crush'd this trophied power; 
Sunk are our vanquish'd arms beneath the indignant tide.  (XERXES
enters, with a few followers. His royal raiment is torn, The entire
closing scene is sung or chanted.)  

XERXES Ah me, how sudden have the storms of Fate, 
Beyond all thought, all apprehension, burst 
On my devoted head! O Fortune, Fortune! 
With what relentless fury hath thy hand 
Hurl'd desolation on the Persian race! 
Wo unsupportable! The torturing thought 
Of our lost youth comes rushing on my mind, 
And sinks me to the ground. O Jove, that 
Had died with those brave men that died in fight I 

CHORUS O thou afflicted monarch, once the lord 
Of marshall'd armies, of the lustre beam'd 
From glory's ray o'er Persia, of her sons 
The pride, the grace, whom ruin now hath sunk 
In blood! The unpeopled land laments her youth 
By Xerxes led to slaughter, till the realms 
Of death are gorged with Persians; for the flower 
Of all the realm, thousands, whose dreadful bows 
With arrowy shower annoy'd the foe, are fall'n. 

XERXES Your fall, heroic youths, distracts my soul. 

CHORUS And Asia sinking on her knee, O king, 
Oppress'd, with griefs oppress'd, bends to the earth. 

XERXES And I, O wretched fortune, I was born 
To crush, to desolate my ruin'd country! 

CHORUS I have no voice, no swelling harmony, 
No descant, save these notes of wo, 
Harsh, and responsive to the sullen sigh, 
Rude strains, that unmelodious flow, 
To welcome thy return. 

XERXES Then bid them flow, bid the wild measures flow 
Hollow, unmusical, the notes of grief; 
They suit my fortune, and dejected state. 

CHORUS Yes, at thy royal bidding shall the strain 
Pour the deep sorrows of my soul; 
The suff'rings of my bleeding country plain, 
And bid the mournful measures roll. 
Again the voice of wild despair 
With thrilling shrieks shall pierce the air; 
For high the god of war his flaming crest 
Raised, with the fleet of Greece surrounded, 
The haughty arms of Greece with conquest bless'd, 
And Persia's wither'd force confounded, 
Dash'd on the dreary beach her heroes slain, 
Or whelm'd them in the darken'd main. 

XERXES To swell thy griefs ask ev'ry circumstance. 

CHORUS Where are thy valiant friends, thy chieftains where?

Pharnaces, Susas, and the might 
Of Pelagon, and Dotamas? The spear 
Of Agabates bold in fight? 
Psammis in mailed cuirass dress'd, 
And Susiscanes' glitt'ring crest? 

XERXES Dash'd from the Tyrian vessel on the rocks 
Of Salamis they sunk, and smear'd with gore 
The heroes on the dreary strand are stretch'd. 

CHORUS Where is Pharnuchus? Ariomardus where, 
With ev'ry gentle virtue graced? 
Lilaeus, that from chiefs renown'd in war 
His high-descended lineage traced? 
Where rears Sebalces his crown-circled head: 
Where Tharybis to battles bred, 
Artembares, Hystaechmes bold, 
Memphis, Masistress sheath'd in gold? 

XERXES Wretch that I am! These on the abhorred town 
Ogygian Athens, roll'd their glowing eyes 
Indignant; but at once in the fierce shock 
Of battle fell, dash'd breathless on the ground. 

CHORUS There does the son of Batanochus lie, 
Through whose rich veins the unsullied blood 
Of Susamus, down from the lineage high 
Of noble Mygabatas flow'd: 
Alpistus, who with faithful care 
Number'd the deep'ning files of war, 
The monarch's eye; on the ensanguined plain 
Low is the mighty warrior laid? 
Is great Aebares 'mong the heroes slain, 
And Partheus number'd with the dead?- 
Ah me! those bursting groans, deep-charged with wo, 
The fate of Persia's princes show. 

XERXES To my grieved memory thy mournful voice, 
Tuned to the saddest notes of wo, recalls 
My brave friends lost; and my rent heart returns 
In dreadful symphony the sorrowing strain. 

CHORUS Yet once more shall I ask thee, yet once more, 
Where is the Mardian Xanthes' might, 
The daring chief, that from the Pontic shore 
Led his strong phalanx to the fight? 
Anchares where, whose high-raised shield 
Flamed foremost in the embattled field? 
Where the high leaders of thy mail-clad horse, 
Daixis and Arsaces where? 
Where Cigdadatas and Lythimnas' force, 
Waving untired his purple spear? 

XERXES Entomb'd, I saw them in the earth entomb'd; 
Nor did the rolling car with solemn state 
Attend their rites: I follow'd: low they lie 
(Ah me, the once great leaders of my host! 
Low in the earth, without their honours lie.) 

CHORUS O wo, wo, wo! Unutterable wo 
The demons of revenge have spread; 
And Ate from her drear abode below 
Rises to view the horrid deed. 

XERXES Dismay, and rout, and ruin, ills that wait 
On man's afflicted fortune, sink us down. 

CHORUS Dismay, and rout, and ruin on us wait, 
And all the vengeful storms of Fate: 
Ill flows on ill, on sorrows sorrows rise; 
Misfortune leads her baleful train; 
Before the Ionian squadrons Persia flies, 
Or sinks ingulf'd beneath the main. 
Fall'n, fall'n is her imperial power, 
And conquest on her banners waits no more. 

XERXES At such a fall, such troops of heroes lost, 
How can my soul but sink in deep despair! 
Cease thy sad strain. 

CHORUS Is all thy glory lost? 

XERXES Seest thou these poor remains of my rent robes? 

CHORUS I see, I see. 

XERXES And this ill-furnish'd quiver? 

CHORUS Wherefore preserved? 

XERXES To store my treasured arrows. 

CHORUS Few, very few. 

XERXES And few my friendly aids. 

CHORUS I thought these Grecians shrunk appall'd at arms.

XERXES No: they are bold and daring: these sad eyes 
Beheld their violent and deathful deeds. 

CHORUS The ruin, sayst thou, of thy shattered fleet? 

XERXES And in the anguish of my soul I rent 
My royal robes. 

CHORUS Wo, wo! 

XERXES And more than wo. 

CHORUS Redoubled, threefold wo! 

XERXES Disgrace to me, 
But triumph to the foe. 

CHORUS Are all thy powers 
In ruin crush'd? 

XERXES No satrap guards me now. 

CHORUS Thy faithful friends sunk in the roaring main. 

XERXES Weep, weep their loss, and lead me to my house; 
Answer my grief with grief, an ill return 
Of ills for ills. Yet once more raise that strain 
Lamenting my misfortunes; beat thy breast, 
Strike, heave the groan; awake the Mysian strain 
To notes of loudest wo; rend thy rich robes, 
Pluck up thy beard, tear off thy hoary locks, 
And battle thine eyes in tears: thus through the streets

Solemn and slow with sorrow lead my steps; 
Lead to my house, and wail the fate of Persia. 

CHORUS Yes, once more at thy bidding shall the strain 
Pour the deep sorrows of my soul; 
The suff'rings of my bleeding untry plain, 
And bid the Mysian measures roll. 
Again the voice of wild despair 
With thrilling shrieks shall pierce the air; 
For high the god of war his flaming crest 
Raised, with the fleet of Greece surrounded, 
The haughty arms of Greece with conquest bless'd, 
And Persia's withered force confounded, 
Dash'd on the dreary beach her heroes slain., 
Or whelm'd them in the darken'd main. 

THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Mountainous country, and in the middle of a deep gorge a Rock, towards
which KRATOS and BIA carry the gigantic form of PROMETHEUS. HEPHAESTUS
follows dejectedly with hammer, nails, chains, etc.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

KRATOS Now have we journeyed to a spot of earth 
Remote-the Scythian wild, a waste untrod. 
And now, Hephaestus, thou must execute 
The task our father laid on thee, and fetter 
This malefactor to the jagged rocks 
In adamantine bonds infrangible; 
For thine own blossom of all forging fire 
He stole and gave to mortals; trespass grave 
For which the Gods have called him to account, 
That he may learn to bear Zeus' tyranny 
And cease to play the lover of mankind. 

HEPHAESTUS Kratos and Bia, for ye twain the hest 
Of Zeus is done with; nothing lets you further. 
But forcibly to bind a brother God, 
In chains, in this deep chasm raked by all storms 
I have not courage; yet needs must I pluck 
Courage from manifest necessity, 
For woe worth him that slights the Father's word. 
O high-souled son of them is sage in counsel, 
With heavy heart I must make thy heart heavy, 
In bonds of brass not easy to be loosed, 
Nailing thee to this crag where no wight dwells, 
Nor sound of human voice nor shape of man 
Shall visit thee; but the sun-blaze shall roast 
Thy flesh; thy hue, flower-fair, shall suffer change; 
Welcome will Night be when with spangled robe 
She hides the light of day; welcome the sun 
Returning to disperse the frosts of dawn. 
And every hour shall bring its weight of woe 
To wear thy heart away; for yet unborn 
Is he who shall release Chee from thy pain. 
This is thy wage for loving humankind. 
For, being a God, thou dared'st the Gods' ill will, 
Preferring, to exceeding honour, Man. 
Wherefore thy long watch shall be comfortless, 
Stretched on this rock, never to close an eye 
Or bend a knee; and vainly shalt thou lift, 
With groanings deep and lamentable cries, 
Thy voice; for Zeus is hard to be entreated, 
As new-born power is ever pitiless. 

KRATOS Enough! Why palter? Why wast idle pity? 
Is not the God Gods loathe hateful to thee? 
Traitor to man of thy prerogative? 

HEPHAESTUS Kindred and fellowship are dreaded names. 

KRATOS Questionless; but to slight the Father's word- 
How sayest thou? Is not this fraught with more dread? 

HEPHAESTUS Thy heart was ever hard and overbold. 

KRATOS But wailing will not ease him! Waste no pains 
Where thy endeavour nothing profiteth. 

HEPHAESTUS Oh execrable work! O handicraft! 

KRATOS Why curse thy trade? For what thou hast to do, 
Troth, smithcraft is in no wise answerable. 

HEPHAESTUS Would that it were another's craft, not mine!

KRATOS Why, all things are a burden save to rule 
Over the Gods; for none is free but Zeus. 

HEPHAESTUS To that I answer not, knowing it true. 

KRATOS Why, then, make haste to cast the chains about him,

Lest glancing down on thee the Father's eye 
Behold a laggard and a loiterer. 

HEPHAESTUS Here are the iron bracelets for his arms. 

KRATOS Fasten them round his arms with all thy strength!

Strike with thy hammer! Nail him to the rocks! 

HEPHAESTUS 'Tis done! and would that it were done less well!

KRATOS Harder-I say-strike harder-screw all tight 
And be not in the least particular 
Remiss, for unto one of his resource 
Bars are but instruments of liberty. 

HEPHAESTUS This forearm's fast: a shackle hard to shift.

KRATOS Now buckle this! and handsomely! Let him learn 
Sharp though he be, he's a dull blade to Zeus. 

HEPHAESTUS None can find fault with this: -save him it tortures.

KRATOS Now take thine iron spike and drive it in, 
Until it gnaw clean through the rebel's breast. 

HEPHAESTUS Woe's me, Prometheus, for thy weight of woe!

KRATOS Still shirking? still a-groaning for the foes 
Of Zeus? Anon thou'lt wail thine own mishap. 

HEPHAESTUS Thou seest what eyes scarce bear to look upon!

KRATOS I see this fellow getting his deserts! 
But strap him with a gelt about his ribs. 

HEPHAESTUS I do what I must do: for thee-less words! 

KRATOS "Words," quotha? Aye, and shout 'em if need be. 
Come down and cast a ring-bolt round his legs. 

HEPHAESTUS The thing is featly done; and 'twas quick work.

KRATOS Now with a sound rap knock the bolt-pins home! 
For heavy-handed is thy task-master. 

HEPHAESTUS So villainous a form vile tongue befits. 

KRATOS Be thou the heart of wax, but chide not me 
That I am gruffish, stubborn and stiff-willed. 

HEPHAESTUS Oh, come away! The tackle holds him fast. 

KRATOS Now, where thou hang'st insult Plunder the Gods 
For creatures of a day! To thee what gift 
Will mortals tender to requite thy pains? 
The destinies were out miscalling the 
Designer: a designer thou wilt need 
From trap so well contrived to twist thee free.  (Exeunt.)

PROMETHEUS O divine air Breezes on swift bird-wings, 
Ye river fountains, and of ocean-waves 
The multitudinous laughter Mother Earth! 
And thou all-seeing circle of the sun, 
Behold what I, a God, from Gods endure! 
Look down upon my shame, 
The cruel wrong that racks my frame, 
The grinding anguish that shall waste my strength, 
Till time's ten thousand years have measured out their length!

He hath devised these chains, 
The new throned potentate who reigns, 
Chief of the chieftains of the Blest. Ah me! 
The woe which is and that which yet shall be 
I wail; and question make of these wide skies 
When shall the star of my deliverance rise. 
And yet-and yet-exactly I foresee 
All that shall come to pass; no sharp surprise 
Of pain shall overtake me; what's determined 
Bear, as I can, I must, knowing the might 
Of strong Necessity is unconquerable. 
But touching my fate silence and speech alike 
Are unsupportable. For boons bestowed 
On mortal men I am straitened in these bonds. 
I sought the fount of fire in hollow reed 
Hid privily, a measureless resource 
For man, and mighty teacher of all arts. 
This is the crime that I must expiate 
Hung here in chains, nailed 'neath the open sky. Ha! Ha!

What echo, what odour floats by with no sound? 
God-wafted or mortal or mingled its strain? 
Comes there one to this world's end, this mountain-girt ground,

To have sight of my torment? Or of what is he fain? 
A God ye behold in bondage and pain, 
The foe of Zeus and one at feud with all 
The deities that find 
Submissive entry to the tyrant's hall; 
His fault, too great a love of humankind. 
Ah me! Ah me! what wafture nigh at hand, 
As of great birds of prey, is this I hear? 
The bright air fanned 
Whistles and shrills with rapid beat of wings. 
There cometh nought but to my spirit brings 
Horror and fear.  (The DAUGHTERS OF OCEANUS draw near in mid-air in
their winged chariot.)  

CHORUS Put thou all fear away! 
In kindness cometh this array 
On wings of speed to mountain lone, 
Our sire's consent not lightly won. 
But a fresh breeze our convoy brought, 
For loud the din of iron raught 
Even to our sea-cave's cold recess, 
And scared away the meek-eyed bashfulness. 
I tarried not to tic my sandal shoe 
But haste, post haste, through air my winged chariot flew.

PROMETHEUS Ah me! Ah me! 
Fair progeny 
That many-childed Tethys brought to birth, 
Fathered of Ocean old 
Whose sleepless stream is rolled 
Round the vast shores of earth 
Look on me! Look upon these chains 
Wherein I hang fast held 
On rocks high-pinnacled, 
My dungeon and my tower of dole, 
Where o'er the abyss my soul, 
Sad warder, her unwearied watch sustains! 

CHORUS Prometheus, I am gazing on thee now! 
With the cold breath of fear upon my brow, 
Not without mist of dimming tears, 
While to my sight thy giant stature rears 
Its bulk forpined upon these savage rocks 
In shameful bonds the linked adamant locks. 
For now new steersmen take the helm 
Olympian; now with little thought 
Of right, on strange, new laws Zeus stablisheth his realm,

Bringing the mighty ones of old to naught. 

PROMETHEUS Oh that he had conveyed me 
'Neath earth, 'neath hell that swalloweth up the dead; 
In Tartarus, illimitably vast 
With adamantine fetters bound me fast- 
There his fierce anger on me visited, 
Where never mocking laughter could upbraid me 
Of God or aught beside! 
But now a wretch enskied, 
A far-seen vane, 
All they that hate me triumph in my pain. 

CHORUS Who of the Gods is there so pitiless 
That he can triumph in thy sore distress? 
Who doth not inly groan 
With every pang of thine save Zeus alone? 
But he is ever wroth, not to be bent 
From his resolved intent 
The sons of heaven to subjugate; 
Nor shall he cease until his heart be satiate, 
Or one a way devise 
To hurl him from the throne where he doth monarchize. 

PROMETHEUS Yea, of a surety-though he do me wrong, 
Loading my limbs with fetters strong- 
The president 
Of heaven's high parliament 
Shall need me yet to show 
What new conspiracy with privy blow 
Attempts his sceptre and his kingly seat. 
Neither shall words with all persuasion sweet, 
Not though his tongue drop honey, cheat 
Nor charm my knowledge from me; nor dures 
Of menace dire, fear of more grievous pains, 
Unseal my lips, till he have loosed these chains, 
And granted for these injuries redress. 

CHORUS High is the heart of thee, 
Thy will no whit by bitter woes unstrung, 
And all too free 
The licence of thy bold, unshackled tongue. 
But fear hath roused my soul with piercing cry! 
And for thy fate my heart misgives me! I 
Tremble to know when through the breakers' roar 
Thy keel shall touch again the friendly shore; 
For not by prayer to Zeus is access won; 
An unpersuadable heart hath Cronos' son. 

PROMETHEUS I know the heart of Zeus is hard, that he hath tied

Justice to his side; 
But he shall be full gentle thus assuaged; 
And, the implacable wrath wherewith he raged 
Smoothed quite away, nor he nor I 
Be loth to seal a bond of peace and amity. 

CHORUS All that thou hast to tell I pray unfold, 
That we may hear at large upon what count 
Zeus took thee and with bitter wrong affronts: 
Instruct us, if the telling hurt thee not. 

PROMETHEUS These things are sorrowful for me to speak, 
Yet silence too is sorrow: all ways woe! 
When first the Blessed Ones were filled with wrath 
And there arose division in their midst, 
These instant to hurl Cronos from his throne 
That Zeus might be their king, and these, adverse, 
Contending that he ne'er should rule the Gods, 
Then I, wise counsel urging to persuade 
The Titans, sons of Ouranos and Chthon, 
Prevailed not: but, all indirect essays 
Despising, they by the strong hand, effortless, 
Yet by main force-supposed that they might seize 
Supremacy. But me my mother Themis 
And Gaia, one form called by many names, 
Not once alone with voice oracular 
Had prophesied how power should be disposed- 
That not by strength neither by violence 
The mighty should be mastered, but by guile. 
Which things by me set forth at large, they scorned, 
Nor graced my motion with the least regard. 
Then, of all ways that offered, I judged best, 
Taking my mother with me, to support, 
No backward friend, the not less cordial Zeus. 
And by my politic counsel Tartarus, 
The bottomless and black, old Cronos hides 
With his confederates. So helped by me, 
The tyrant of the Gods, such service rendered 
With ignominious chastisement requites. 
But 'tis a common malady of power 
Tyrannical never to trust a friend. 
And now, what ye inquired, for what arraigned 
He shamefully entreats me, ye shall know. 
When first upon his high, paternal throne 
He took his seat, forthwith to divers Gods 
Divers good gifts he gave, and parcelled out 
His empire, but of miserable men 
Recked not at all; rather it was his wish 
To wipe out man and rear another race: 
And these designs none contravened but me. 
I risked the bord attempt, and saved mankind 
From stark destruction and the road to hell. 
Therefore with this sore penance am I bowed, 
Grievous to suffer, pitiful to see. 
But, for compassion shown to man, such fate 
I no wise earned; rather in wrath's despite 
Am I to be reformed, and made a show 
Of infamy to Zeus. 

CHORUS He hath a heart 
Of iron, hewn out of unfeeling rock 
Is he, Prometheus, whom thy sufferings 
Rouse not to wrath. Would I had ne'er beheld them, 
For verily the sight hath wrung my heart. 

PROMETHEUS Yea, to my friends a woeful sight am I. 

CHORUS Hast not more boldly in aught else transgressed?

PROMETHEUS I took from man expectancy of death. 

CHORUS What medicine found'st thou for this malady? 

PROMETHEUS I planted blind hope in the heart of him. 

CHORUS A mighty boon thou gavest there to man. 

PROMETHEUS Moreover, I conferred the gift of fire. 

CHORUS And have frail mortals now the flame-bright fire?

PROMETHEUS Yea, and shall master many arts thereby. 

CHORUS And Zeus with such misfeasance charging thee- 

PROMETHEUS Torments me with extremity of woe. 

CHORUS And is no end in prospect of thy pains? 

PROMETHEUS None; save when he shall choose to make an end.

CHORUS How should he choose? What hope is thine? Dost thou

Not see that thou hast erred? But how thou erredst 
Small pleasure were to me to tell; to the 
Exceeding sorrow. Let it go then: rather 
Seek thou for some deliverance from thy woes. 

PROMETHEUS He who stands free with an untrammelled foot

Is quick to counsel and exhort a friend 
In trouble. But all these things I know well. 
Of my free will, my own free will, I erred, 
And freely do I here acknowledge it. 
Freeing mankind myself have durance found. 
Natheless, I looked not for sentence so dread, 
High on this precipice to droop and pine, 
Having no neighbour but the desolate crags. 
And now lament no more the ills I suffer, 
But come to earth and an attentive ear 
Lend to the things that shall befall hereafter. 
Harken, oh harken, suffer as I suffer! 
Who knows, who knows, but on some scatheless head, 
Another's yet for the like woes reserved, 
The wandering doom will presently alight? 

CHORUS Prometheus, we have heard thy call: 
Not on deaf ears these awful accents fall. 
Lo! lightly leaving at thy words 
My flying car 
And holy air, the pathway of great birds, 
I long to tread this land of peak and scar, 
And certify myself by tidings sure 
Of all thou hast endured and must endure.  (While the winged chariot
of the OCEANIDES comes to ground their father OCEANUS enters, riding
on a monster.)  

OCEANUS Now have I traversed the unending plain 
And unto thee, Prometheus, am I come, 
Guiding this winghd monster with no rein, 
Nor any bit, but mind's firm masterdom. 
And know that for thy grief my heart is sore; 
The bond of kind, methinks, constraineth me; 
Nor is there any I would honour more, 
Apart from kinship, than I reverence thee. 
And thou shalt learn that I speak verity: 
Mine is no smooth, false tongue; for do but show 
How I can serve thee, grieved and outraged thus, 
Thou ne'er shalt say thou hast, come weal, come woe, 
A friend more faithful than Oceanus. 

PROMETHEUS How now? Who greets me? What! Art thou too come

To gaze upon my woes? How could'st thou leave 
The stream that bears thy name, thine antres arched 
With native rock, to visit earth that breeds 
The massy iron in her womb? Com'st thou 
To be spectator of my evil lot 
And fellow sympathizer with my woes? 
Behold, a thing indeed to gaze upon 
The friend of Zeus, co-stablisher of his rule, 
See, by this sentence with what pains I am bowed I 

OCEANUS Prometheus, all too plainly I behold: 
And for the best would counsel thee: albeit 
Thy brain is subtle. Learn to know thy heart, 
And, as the times, so let thy manners change, 
For by the law of change a new God rules. 
But, if these bitter, savage, sharp-set words 
Thou ventest, it may be, though he sit throned 
Far off and high above thee, Zeus will hear; 
And then thy present multitude of ills 
Will seem the mild correction of a babe. 
Rather, O thou much chastened one, refrain 
Thine anger, and from suffering seek release. 
Stale, peradventure, seem these words of mine: 
Nevertheless, of a too haughty tongue 
Such punishment, Prometheus, is the wage. 
But thou, not yet brought low by suffering, 
To what thou hast of ill would'st add far worse. 
Therefore, while thou hast me for schoolmaster, 
Thou shalt not kick against the pricks; the more 
That an arch-despot who no audit dreads 
Rules by his own rough will. And now I leave thee, 
To strive with what success I may command 
For thy deliv'rance. Keep a quiet mind 
And use not over-vehemence of speech- 
Knowest thou not, being exceeding wise, 
A wanton, idle tongue brings chastisement? 

PROMETHEUS I marvel that thou art not in my case, 
Seeing with me thou did'st adventure all. 
And now, I do entreat thee, spare thyself. 
Thou wilt not move him: he's not easy moved 
Take heed lest thou find trouble by the way. 

OCEANUS Thou are a better counsellor to others 
Than to thyself: I judge by deeds not words. 
Pluck me not back when I would fain set forth. 
My oath upon it, Zeus will grant my prayer 
And free thee from these pangs. 

PROMETHEUS I tender the 
For this my thanks and ever-during praise. 
Certes, no backward friend art thou; and yet 
Trouble not thyself; for at the best thy labour 
Will nothing serve me, if thou mean'st to serve. 
Being thyself untrammelled stand fast. 
For, not to mitigate my own mischance, 
Would I see others hap on evil days. 
The thought be far from me. I feel the weight 
Of Atlas' woes, my brother in the west 
Shouldering the pillar that props heaven and earth, 
No wieldy fardel for his arms to fold. 
The giant dweller in Cilician dens 
I saw and pitied-a terrific shape, 
A hundred-headed monster-when he fell, 
Resistless Typhon who withstood the Gods, 
With fearsome hiss of beak-mouth horrible, 
While lightning from his eyes with Gorgon-glare 
Flashed for the ravage of the realm of Zeus. 
But on him came the bolt that never sleeps, 
Down-crashing thunder, with emitted fire, 
Which shattered him and all his towering hopes 
Dashed into ruin; smitten through the breast, 
His strength as smoking cinder, lightning-charred. 
And now a heap, a helpless, sprawling hulk, 
He lies stretched out beside the narrow seas, 
Pounded and crushed deep under Etna's roots. 
But on the mountain-top Hephaestus sits 
Forging the molten iron, whence shall burst 
Rivers of fire, with red and ravening jaws 
To waste fair-fruited, smooth, Sicilian fields. 
Such bilious up-boiling of his ire 
Shall Typho vent, with slingstone-showers red-hot, 
And unapproachable surge of fiery spray, 
Although combusted by the bolt of Zeus. 
But thou art not unlearned, nor needest me 
To be thy teacher: save thyself the way 
Thou knowest and I will fortify my heart 
Until the wrathfulness of Zeus abate. 

OCEANUS Nay then, Prometheus, art thou ignorant 
Words are physicians to a wrath-sick soul? 

PROMETHEUS Yes, if with skill one soften the ripe core,

Not by rough measures make it obdurate. 

OCEANUS Seest thou in warm affection detriment 
Or aught untoward in adventuring? 

PROMETHEUS A load of toil and a light mind withal. 

OCEANUS Then give me leave to call that sickness mine. 
Wise men accounted fools attain their ends. 

PROMETHEUS But how if I am galled by thine offence? 

OCEANUS There very palpably thou thrustest home. 

PROMETHEUS Beware lest thou through pity come to broils.

OCEANUS With one established in Omnipotence? 

PROMETHEUS Of him take heed lest thou find heaviness. 

OCEANUS I am schooled by thy calamity, Prometheus! 

PROMETHEUS Pack then! And, prithee, do not change thy mind!

OCEANUS Thou criest "On" to one in haste to go. 
For look, my dragon with impatient wings 
Flaps at the broad, smooth road of level air. 
Fain would he kneel him down in his own stall.  (Exit OCEANUS.)

CHORUS  (after alighting) I mourn for thee, Prometheus, minished
and brought low, 
Watering my virgin cheeks with these sad drops, that flow

From sorrow's rainy fount, to fill soft-lidded eyes 
With pure libations for thy fortune's obsequies. 
An evil portion that none coveteth hath Zeus 
Prepared for thee; by self-made laws established for his use

Disposing all, the elder Gods he purposeth to show 
How strong is that right arm wherewith he smites a foe. 
There hath gone up a cry from earth, a groaning for the fall

Of things of old renown and shapes majestical, 
And for thy passing an exceeding bitter groan; 
For thee and for thy brother Gods whose honour was thine own:

These things all they who dwell in Asia's holy seat, 
Time's minions, mourn and with their groans thy groans repeat.

Yea, and they mourn who dwell beside the Colchian shore,

The hero maids unwedded that delight in war, 
And Scythia's swarming myriads who their dwelling make 
Around the borders of the world, the salt Maeotian lake.

Mourns Ares' stock, that flowers in desert Araby, 
And the strong city mourns, the hill-fort planted high, 
Near neighbour to huge Caucasus, dread mountaineers 
That love the clash of arms, the counter of sharp spears.

Beforetime of all Gods one have I seen in pain, 
One only Titan bound with adamantine chain, 
Atlas in strength supreme, who groaning stoops, downbent

Under the burthen of the earth and heaven's broad firmament.

Bellows the main of waters, surge with foam-seethed surge

Clashing tumultuous; for thee the deep seas chant their dirge;

And Hell's dark under-world a hollow moaning fills; 
Thee mourn the sacred streams with all their fountain-rills.

PROMETHEUS Think not that I for pride and stubbornness 
Am silent: rather is my heart the prey 
Of gnawing thoughts, both for the past, and now 
Seeing myself by vengeance buffeted. 
For to these younger Gods their precedence 
Who severally determined if not I? 
No more of that: I should but weary you 
With things ye know; but listen to the tale 
Of human sufferings, and how at first 
Senseless as beasts I gave men sense, possessed them 
Of mind. I speak not in contempt of man; 
I do but tell of good gifts I conferred. 
In the beginning, seeing they saw amiss, 
And hearing heard not, but, like phantoms huddled 
In dreams, the perplexed story of their days 
Confounded; knowing neither timber-work 
Nor brick-built dwellings basking in the light, 
But dug for themselves holes, wherein like ants, 
That hardly may contend against a breath, 
They dwelt in burrows of their unsunned caves. 
Neither of winter's cold had they fixed sign, 
Nor of the spring when she comes decked with flowers, 
Nor yet of summer's heat with melting fruits 
Sure token: but utterly without knowledge 
Moiled, until I the rising of the stars 
Showed them, and when they set, though much obscure. 
Moreover, number, the most excellent 
Of all inventions, I for them devised, 
And gave them writing that retaineth all, 
The serviceable mother of the Muse. 
I was the first that yoked unmanaged beasts, 
To serve as slaves with collar and with pack, 
And take upon themselves, to man's relief, 
The heaviest labour of his hands: and 
Tamed to the rein and drove in wheeled cars 
The horse, of sumptuous pride the ornament. 
And those sea-wanderers with the wings of cloth, 
The shipman's waggons, none but I contrived. 
These manifold inventions for mankind 
I perfected, who, out upon't, have none- 
No, not one shift-to rid me of this shame. 

CHORUS Thy sufferings have been shameful, and thy mind 
Strays at a loss: like to a bad physician 
Fallen sick, thou'rt out of heart: nor cans't prescribe 
For thine own case the draught to make thee sound. 

PROMETHEUS But hear the sequel and the more admire 
What arts, what aids I cleverly evolved. 
The chiefest that, if any man fell sick, 
There was no help for him, comestible, 
Lotion or potion; but for lack of drugs 
They dwindled quite away; until I taught them 
To compound draughts and mixtures sanative, 
Wherewith they now are armed against disease. 
I staked the winding path of divination 
And was the first distinguisher of dreams, 
The true from false; and voices ominous 
Of meaning dark interpreted; and tokens 
Seen when men take the road; and augury 
By flight of all the greater crook-clawed birds 
With nice discrimination I defined; 
These by their nature fair and favourable, 
Those, flattered with fair name. And of each sort 
The habits I described; their mutual feuds 
And friendships and the assemblages they hold. 
And of the plumpness of the inward parts 
What colour is acceptable to the Gods, 
The well-streaked liver-lobe and gall-bladder. 
Also by roasting limbs well wrapped in fat 
And the long chine, I led men on the road 
Of dark and riddling knowledge; and I purged 
The glancing eye of fire, dim before, 
And made its meaning plain. These are my works. 
Then, things beneath the earth, aids hid from man, 
Brass, iron, silver, gold, who dares to say 
He was before me in discovering? 
None, I wot well, unless he loves to babble. 
And in a single word to sum the whole- 
All manner of arts men from Prometheus learned. 

CHORUS Shoot not beyond the mark in succouring man 
While thou thyself art comfortless: for 
Am of good hope that from these bonds escaped 
Thou shalt one day be mightier than Zeus. 

PROMETHEUS Fate, that brinks all things to an end, not thus

Apportioneth my lot: ten thousand pangs 
Must bow, ten thousand miseries afflict me 
Ere from these bonds I freedom find, for Art 
Is by much weaker than Necessity. 

CHORUS Who is the pilot of Necessity? 

PROMETHEUS The Fates triform, and the unforgetting Furies.

CHORUS So then Zeus is of lesser might than these? 

PROMETHEUS Surely he shall not shun the lot apportioned.

CHORUS What lot for Zeus save world-without-end reign? 

PROMETHEUS Tax me no further with importunate questions.

CHORUS O deep the mystery thou shroudest there 

PROMETHEUS Of aught but this freely thou may'st discourse;

But touching this I charge thee speak no word; 
Nay, veil it utterly: for strictly kept 
The secret from these bonds shall set me free. 

CHORUS May Zeus who all things swayeth 
Ne'er wreak the might none stayeth 
On wayward will of mine; 
May I stint not nor waver 
With offerings of sweet savour 
And feasts of slaughtered kine; 
The holy to the holy, 
With frequent feet and lowly 
At altar, fane and shrine, 
Over the Ocean marches, 
The deep that no drought parches, 
Draw near to the divine. 
My tongue the Gods estrange not; 
My firm set purpose change not, 
As wax melts in fire-shine. 
Sweet is the life that lengthens, 
While joyous hope still strengthens, 
And glad, bright thoughts sustain; 
But shuddering I behold thee, 
The sorrows that enfold thee 
And all thine endless pain. 
For Zeus thou hast despised; 
Thy fearless heart misprized 
All that his vengeance can, 
Thy wayward will obeying, 
Excess of honour paying, 
Prometheus, unto man. 
And, oh, beloved, for this graceless grace 
What thanks? What prowess for thy bold essay 
Shall champion thee from men of mortal race, 
The petty insects of a passing day? 
Saw'st not how puny is the strength they spend? 
With few, faint steps walking as dreams and blind, 
Nor can the utmost of their lore transcend 
The harmony of the Eternal Mind. 
These things I learned seeing thy glory dimmed, 
Prometheus. Ah, not thus on me was shed 
The rapture of sweet music, when I hymned 
The marriage-song round bath and bridal bed 
At thine espousals, and of thy blood-kin, 
A bride thou chosest, wooing her to thee 
With all good gifts that may a Goddess win, 
Thy father's child, divine Hesione.  (Enter IO, crazed and horned.)

IO What land is this? What people here abide? 
And who is he, 
The prisoner of this windswept mountain-side? 
Speak, speak to me; 
Tell me, poor caitiff, how did'st thou transgress, 
Thus buffeted? 
Whither am I, half-dead with weariness, 
For-wandered? 
Ha! Ha! 
Again the prick, the stab of gadfly-sting! 
O earth, earth, hide, 
The hollow shape-Argus-that evil thing- 
The hundred-eyed- 
Earth-born-herdsman! I see him yet; he stalks 
With stealthy pace 
And crafty watch not all my poor wit baulks! 
From the deep place 
Of earth that hath his bones he breaketh bound, 
And from the pale 
Of Death, the Underworld, a hell-sent hound 
On the blood-trail, 
Fasting and faint he drives me on before, 
With spectral hand, 
Along the windings of the wasteful shore, 
The salt sea-sand! 
List! List! the pipe! how drowzily it shrills! 
A cricket-cry! 
See! See! the wax-webbed reeds! Oh, to these ills 
Ye Gods on high, 
Ye blessed Gods, what bourne? O wandering feet 
When will ye rest? 
O Cronian child, wherein by aught unmeet 
Have I transgressed 
To be yoke-fellow with Calamity? 
My mind unstrung, 
A crack-brained lack-wit, frantic mad am I, 
By gad-fly stung, 
Thy scourge, that tarres me on with buzzing wingl 
Plunge me in fire, 
Hide me in earth, to deep-sea monsters fling, 
But my desire- 
Kneeling I pray-grudge not to grant, O King! 
Too long a race 
Stripped for the course have I run to and fro; 
And still I chase 
The vanishing goal, the end of all my woe; 
Enough have I mourned! 
Hear'st thou the lowing of the maid cow-horned? 

PROMETHEUS How should I hear thee not? Thou art the child

Of Inachus, dazed with the dizzying fly. 
The heart of Zeus thou hast made hot with love 
And Hera's curse even as a runner stripped 
Pursues thee ever on thine endless round. 

IO How dost thou know my father's name? Impart 
To one like thee 
A poor, distressful creature, who thou art. 
Sorrow with me, 
Sorrowful one! Tell me, whose voice proclaims 
Things true and sad, 
Naming by all their old, unhappy names, 
What drove me mad- 
Sick! Sick! ye Gods, with suffering ye have sent, 
That clings and clings; 
Wasting my lamp of life till it be spent! 
Crazed with your stings! 
Famished I come with trampling and with leaping, 
Torment and shame, 
To Hera's cruel wrath, her craft unsleeping, 
Captive and tame 
Of all wights woe-begone and fortune-crossed, 
Oh, in the storm 
Of the world's sorrow is there one so lost? 
Speak, godlike form, 
And be in this dark world my oracle I 
Can'st thou not sift 
The things to come? Hast thou no art to tell 
What subtle shift, 
Or sound of charming song shall make me well? 
Hide naught of ill 
But-if indeed thou knowest-prophesy- 
In words that thrill 
Clear-toned through air-what such a wretch as 
Must yet abide- 
The lost, lost maid that roams earth's kingdoms wide? 

PROMETHEUS What thou wouldst learn I will make clear to thee,

Not weaving subtleties, but simple sooth 
Unfolding as the mouth should speak to friends. 
I am Prometheus, giver of fire to mortals. 

IO Oh universal succour of mankind, 
Sorrowful Prometheus, why art thou punished thus? 

PROMETHEUS I have but now ceased mourning for my griefs.

IO Wilt thou not grant me then so small a boon? 

PROMETHEUS What is it thou dost ask? Thou shalt know all.

IO Declare to me who chained thee in this gorge. 

PROMETHEUS The hest of Zeus, but 'twas Hephaestus' hand.

IO But what transgression dost thou expiate? 

PROMETHEUS Let this suffice thee: thou shalt know no more.

IO Nay, but the end of my long wandering 
When shall it be? This too thou must declare. 

PROMETHEUS That it is better for thee not to know. 

IO Oh hide not from me what I have to suffer! 

PROMETHEUS Poor child! Poor child! I do not grudge the gift.

IO Why then, art thou so slow to tell me all? 

PROMETHEUS It is not from unkindness; but I fear 
'Twill break thy heart. 

IO Take thou no thought for me 
Where thinking thwarteth heart's desire! 

PROMETHEUS So keen 
To know thy sorrows! List I and thou shalt learn. 

CHORUS Not till thou hast indulged a wish of mine. 
First let us hear the story of her grief 
And she herself shall tell the woeful tale. 
After, thy wisdom shall impart to her 
The conflict yet to come. 

PROMETHEUS So be it, then. 
And, Io, thus much courtesy thou owest 
These maidens being thine own father's kin. 
For with a moving story of our woes 
To win a tear from weeping auditors 
In nought demeans the teller. 

IO I know not 
How fitly to refuse; and at your wish 
All ye desire to know I will in plain, 
Round terms set forth. And yet the telling of it 
Harrows my soul; this winter's tale of wrong, 
Of angry Gods and brute deformity, 
And how and why on me these horrors swooped. 
Always there were dreams visiting by night 
The woman's chambers where I slept; and they 
With flattering words admonished and cajoled me, 
Saying, "O lucky one, so long a maid? 
And what a match for thee if thou would'st wed 
Why, pretty, here is Zeus as hot as hot- 
Love-sick-to have thee! Such a bolt as thou 
Hast shot clean through his heart And he won't rest 
Till Cypris help him win thee! Lift not then, 
My daughter, a proud foot to spurn the bed 
Of Zeus: but get thee gone to meadow deep 
By Lerna's marsh, where are thy father's flocks 
And cattle-folds, that on the eye of Zeus 
May fall the balm that shall assuage desire." 
Such dreams oppressed me, troubling all my nights, 
Woe's me! till I plucked courage up to tell 
My father of these fears that walked in darkness. 
And many times to Pytho and Dodona 
He sent his sacred missioners, to inquire 
How, or by deed or word, he might conform 
To the high will and pleasure of the Gods. 
And they returned with slippery oracles, 
Nought plain, but all to baffle and perplex- 
And then at last to Inachus there raught 
A saying that flashed clear; the drift, that 
Must be put out from home and country, forced 
To be a wanderer at the ends of the earth, 
A thing devote and dedicate; and if 
I would not, there should fall a thunderbolt 
From Zeus, with blinding flash, and utterly 
Destroy my race. So spake the oracle 
Of Loxias. In sorrow he obeyed, 
And from beneath his roof drove forth his child 
Grieving as he grieved, and from house and home 
Bolted and barred me out. But the high hand 
Of Zeus bear hardly on the rein of fate. 
And, instantly-even in a moment-mind 
And body suffered strange distortion. Horned 
Even as ye see me now, and with sharp bite 
Of gadfly pricked, with high-flung skip, stark-mad, 
I bounded, galloping headlong on, until 
I came to the sweet and of the stream 
Kerchneian, hard by Lerna's spring. And thither 
Argus, the giant herdsman, fierce and fell 
As a strong wine unmixed, with hateful cast 
Of all his cunning eyes upon the trail, 
Gave chase and tracked me down. And there he perished 
By violent and sudden doom surprised. 
But I with darting sting-the scorpion whip 
Of angry Gods-am lashed from land to land. 
Thou hast my story, and, if thou can'st tell 
What I have still to suffer, speak; but do not, 
Moved by compassion, with a lying tale 
Warm my cold heart; no sickness of the soul 
Is half so shameful as composed falsehoods. 

CHORUS Off! lost one! off! Horror, I cry! 
Horror and misery 
Was this the traveller's tale I craved to hear? 
Oh, that mine eyes should see 
A sight so ill to look upon! Ah me! 
Sorrow, defilement, haunting fear, 
Fan my blood cold, 
Stabbed with a two-edged sting! 
O Fate, Fate, Fate, tremblingly I behold 
The plight of Io, thine apportioning! 

PROMETHEUS Thou dost lament too soon, and art as one 
All fear. Refrain thyself till thou hast heard 
What's yet to be. 

CHORUS Speak and be our instructor: 
There is a kind of balm to the sick soul 
In certain knowledge of the grief to come. 

PROMETHEUS Your former wish I lightly granted ye: 
And ye have heard, even as ye desired, 
From this maid's lips the story of her sorrow. 
Now hear the sequel, the ensuing woes 
The damsel must endure from Hera's hate. 
And thou, O seed of Inachaean loins, 
Weigh well my words, that thou may'st understand 
Thy journey's end. First towards the rising sun 
Turn hence, and traverse fields that ne'er felt plough 
Until thou reach the country of the Scyths, 
A race of wanderers handling the long-bow 
That shoots afar, and having their habitations 
Under the open sky in wattled cotes 
That move on wheels. Go not thou nigh to them, 
But ever within sound of the breaking waver, 
Pass through their land. And on the left of the 
The Chalybes, workers in iron, dwell. 
Beware of them, for they are savages, 
Who suffer not a stranger to come near. 
And thou shalt reach the river Hybristes, 
Well named. Cross not, for it is ill to cross, 
Until thou come even unto Caucasus, 
Highest of mountains, where the foaming river 
Blows all its volume from the summit ridge 
That o'ertops all. And that star-neighboured ridge 
Thy feet must climb; and, following the road 
That runneth south, thou presently shall reach 
The Amazonian hosts that loathe the male, 
And shall one day remove from thence and found 
Themiscyra hard by Thermodon's stream, 
Where on the craggy Salmadessian coast 
Waves gnash their teeth, the maw of mariners 
And step-mother of ships. And they shall lead the 
Upon thy way, and with a right good will. 
Then shalt thou come to the Cimmerian Isthmus, 
Even at the pass and portals of the sea, 
And leaving it behind thee, stout of heart, 
Cross o'er the channel of Maeotis' lake. 
For ever famous among men shall be 
The story of thy crossing, and the strait 
Be called by a new name, the Bosporus, 
In memory of thee. Then having left 
Europa's soil behind thee thou shalt come 
To the main land of Asia. What think ye? 
Is not the only ruler of the Gods 
A complete tyrant, violent to all, 
Respecting none? First, being himself a God, 
He burneth to enjoy a mortal maid, 
And then torments her with these wanderings. 
A sorry suitor for thy love, poor girl, 
A bitter wooing. Yet having heard so much 
Thou art not even in the overture 
And prelude of the song. 

IO Alas! Oh! Oh! 

PROMETHEUS Thou dost cryout, fetching again deep groans:

What wilt thou do when thou hast heard in full 
The evils yet to come? 

CHORUS And wilt thou tell 
The maiden something further: some fresh sorrow? 

PROMETHEUS A stormy sea of wrong and ruining. 

IO What does it profit me to live! Oh, why 
Do I not throw myself from this rough crag 
And in one leap rid me of all my pain? 
Better to die at once than live, and all 
My days be evil. 

PROMETHEUS Thou would'st find it hard 
To bear what I must bear: for unto me 
It is not given to die,-a dear release 
From pain; but now of suffering there is 
No end in sight till Zeus shall fall. 

IO And shall 
Zeus fall? His power be taken from him? 
No matter when if true- 

PROMETHEUS 'Twould make thee happy 
Methinks, if thou could'st see calamity 
Whelm him. 

IO How should it not when all my woes 
Are of his sending? learn how 
These things shall be. 
The tyrant's rod? 
And fond imaginings. 

IO But how? Oh, speak, 
If the declaring draw no evil down I 

PROMETHEUS A marriage he shall make shall vex him sore.

IO A marriage? Whether of gods or mortals? 
Speak! 
If this be utterable! 

PROMETHEUS Why dost thou ask 
What I may not declare? 

IO And shall he quit 
The throne of all the worlds, by a new spouse 
Supplanted? 

PROMETHEUS She will bear to him a child, 
And he shall be in might more excellent 
Than his progenitor. 

IO And he will find 
No way to parry this strong stroke of fate? 

PROMETHEUS None save my own self-when these bonds are loosed.

IO And who shall loose them if Zeus wills not? 
Of thine own seed. 
How say'st thou? Shall a child 
Of mine release thee? 

PROMETHEUS Son of thine, but son 
The thirteenth generation shall beget. 

IO A prophecy oracularly dark. 

PROMETHEUS Then seek not thou to know thine own fate. 

IO Nay, 
Tender me not a boon to snatch it from me. 

PROMETHEUS Of two gifts thou hast asked one shall be thine.

IO What gifts? Pronounce and leave to me the choice. 

PROMETHEUS Nay, thou are free to choose. Say, therefore, whether

I shall declare to thee thy future woes 
Or him who shall be my deliverer. 

CHORUS Nay, but let both be granted! Unto her 
That which she chooseth, unto me my choice, 
That I, too, may have honour from thy lips. 
First unto her declare her wanderings, 
And unto me him who shall set thee free; 
'Tis that I long to know. 

PROMETHEUS I will resist 
No further, but to your importunacy 
All things which ye-desire to learn reveal. 
And, Io, first to thee I will declare 
Thy far-driven wanderings; write thou my words 
In the retentive tablets of thy heart. 
When thou hast crossed the flood that flows between 
And is the boundary of two continents, 
Turn to the sun's uprising, where he treads 
Printing with fiery steps the eastern sky, 
And from the roaring of the Pontic surge 
Do thou pass on, until before thee lies 
The Gorgonean plain, Kisthene called, 
Where dwell the gray-haired three, the Phorcides, 
Old, mumbling maids, swan-shaped, having one eye 
Betwixt the three, and but a single tooth. 
On them the sun with his brightbeams ne'er glanceth 
Nor moon that lamps the night. Not far from them 
The sisters three, the Gorgons, have their haunt; 
Winged forms, with snaky locks, hateful to man, 
Whom nothing mortal looking on can live. 
Thus much that thou may'st have a care of these. 
Now of another portent thou shalt hear. 
Beware the dogs of Zeus that ne'er give tongue, 
The sharp-beaked gryphons, and the one-eyed horde 
Of Arimaspians, riding upon horses, 
Who dwell around the river rolling gold, 
The ferry and the frith of Pluto's port. 
Go not thou nigh them. After thou shalt come 
To a far land, a dark-skinned race, that dwell 
Beside the fountains of the sun, whence flows 
The river Ethiops: follow its banks 
Until thou comest to the steep-down slope 
Where from the Bibline mountains Nilus old 
Pours the sweet waters of his holy stream. 
And thou, the river guiding thee, shalt come 
To the three-sided, wedge-shaped land of Nile, 
Where for thyself, Io, and for thy children 
Long sojourn is appointed. If in aught 
My story seems to stammer and to er 
From indirectness, ask and ask again 
Till all be manifest. I do not lack 
For leisure, having more than well contents me 

CHORUS If there be aught that she must suffer yet, 
Or aught omitted in the narrative 
Of her long wanderings, I pray thee speak. 
But if thou hast told all, then grant the boon 
We asked and doubtless thou wilt call to mind. 

PROMETHEUS Nay, she has heard the last of her long journey.

But, as some warrant for her patient hearing 
I will relate her former sufferings 
Ere she came hither. Much I will omit 
That had detained us else with long discourse 
And touch at once her journey's thus far goal. 
When thou wast come to the Molossian plain 
That lies about the high top of Dodona, 
Where is an oracle and shrine of Zeus 
Thesprotian, and-portent past belief- 
The talking oaks, the same from whom the word 
Flashed clear and nothing questionably hailed the 
The destined spouse-ah! do I touch old wounds?- 
Of Zeus, honoured above thy sex; stung thence 
In torment, where the road runs by the sea, 
Thou cam'st to the broad gulf of Rhea, whence 
Beat back by a strong wind, thou didst retrace 
Most painfully thy course; and it shall be 
That times to come in memory of thy passage 
Shall call that inlet the Ionian Sea. 
Thus much for thee in witness that my mind 
Beholdeth more than that which leaps to light. 
Now for the things to come; what I shall say 
Concerns ye both alike. Return we then 
And follow our old track. There is a city 
Yclept Canobus, built at the land's end, 
Even at the mouth and mounded silt of Nile, 
And there shall Zeus restore to thee thy mind 
With touch benign and laying on of hands. 
And from that touch thou shalt conceive and bear 
Swarth Epaphus, touch-born; and he shall reap 
As much of earth as Nilus watereth 
With his broad-flowing river. In descent 
The fifth from him there shall come back to Argos, 
Thine ancient home, but driven by hard hap, 
Two score and ten maids, daughters of one house, 
Fleeing pollution of unlawful marriage 
With their next kin, who winged with wild desire, 
As hawks that follow hard on cushat-doves, 
Shall harry prey which they should not pursue 
And hunt forbidden brides. But God shall be 
Exceeding jealous for their chastity; 
And old Pelasgia, for the mortal thrust 
Of woman's hands and midnight murder done 
Upon their new-wed lords, shall shelter them; 
For every wife shall strike her husband down 
Dipping a two-edged broadsword in his blood. 
Oh, that mine enemies might wed such wivesl 
But of the fifty, one alone desire 
Shall tame, as with the stroke of charming-wand, 
So that she shall not lift her hands to slay 
The partner of her bed; yea, melting love 
Shall blunt her sharp-set will, and she shall choose 
Rather to be called weak and womanly 
Than the dark stain of blood; and she shall be 
Mother of kings in Argos. 'Tis a tale 
Were't told in full, would occupy us long. 
For, of her sowing, there shall spring to fame 
The lion's whelp, the archer bold, whose bow 
Shall set me free. This is the oracle 
Themis, my ancient Mother, Titan-born, 
Disclosed to me; but how and in what wise 
Were long to tell, nor would it profit thee. 

IO Again they come, again 
The fury and the pain! 
The gangrened wound! The ache of pulses dinned 
With raging throes 
It beats upon my brain-the burning wind 
That madness blows! 
It pricks-the barb, the hook not forged with heat, 
The gadfly dart! 
Against my ribs with thud of trampling feet 
Hammers my heart! 
And like a bowling wheel mine eyeballs spin, 
And I am flung 
By fierce winds from my course, nor can rein in 
My frantic tongue 
That raves I know not what!-a random tide 
Of words-a froth 
Of muddied waters buffeting the wide, 
High-crested, hateful wave of ruin and God's wrath!  (Exit raving.)

CHORUS I hold him wise who first in his own mind 
This canon fixed and taught it to mankind: 
True marriage is the union that mates 
Equal with equal; not where wealth emasculates, 
Or mighty lineage is magnified, 
Should he who earns his bread look for a bride. 
Therefore, grave mistresses of fate, I pray 
That I may never live to see the day 
When Zeus takes me for his bedfellow; or 
Draw near in love to husband from on high. 
For I am full of fear when I behold 
Io, the maid no human love may fold, 
And her virginity disconsolate, 
Homeless and husbandless by Hera's hate. 
For me, when love is level, fear is far. 
May none of all the Gods that greater are 
Eve me with his unshunnable regard; 
Fir in that warfare victory is hard, 
And of that plenty cometh emptiness. 
What should befall me then I dare not guess; 
Nor whither I should flee that I might shun 
The craft and subtlety of Cronos' Son. 

PROMETHEUS I tell thee that the self-willed pride of Zeus

Shall surely be abased; that even now 
He plots a marriage that shall hurl him forth 
Far out of sight of his imperial throne 
And kingly dignity. Then, in that hour, 
Shall be fulfilled, nor in one tittle fail, 
The curse wherewith his father Cronos cursed him, 
What time he fell from his majestic place 
Established from of old. And such a stroke 
None of the Gods save me could turn aside. 
I know these things shall be and on what wise. 
Therefore let him secure him in his seat, 
And put his trust in airy noise, and swing 
His bright, two-handed, blazing thunderbolt, 
For these shall nothing stead him, nor avert 
Fall insupportable and glory humbled. 
A wrestler of such might he maketh ready 
For his own ruin; yea, a wonder, strong 
In strength unmatchable; and he shall find 
Fire that shall set at naught the burning bolt 
And blasts more dreadful that o'er-crow the thunder. 
The pestilence that scourgeth the deep seas 
And shaketh solid earth, the three-pronged mace, 
Poseidon's spear, a mightier shall scatter; 
And when he stumbleth striking there his foot, 
Fallen on evil days, the tyrant's pride 
Shall measure all the miserable length 
That parts rule absolute from servitude. 

CHORUS Methinks the wish is father to the thought 
And whets thy railing tongue. 

PROMETHEUS Not so: the wish And the accomplishment go hand in hand.

CHORUS Then must we look for one who shall supplant 
And reign instead of Zeus? 
Far, far more grievous shall bow down his neck. 

CHORUS Hast thou no fear venting such blasphemy? 

PROMETHEUS What should I fear who have no part nor lot 
In doom of dying? 

CHORUS But he might afflict the 
With agony more dreadful, pain beyond 
These pains. 

PROMETHEUS Why let him if he will 
All evils I foreknow. 

CHORUS Ah, they are wise 
Who do obeisance, prostrate in the dust, 
To the implacable, eternal Will. 

PROMETHEUS Go thou and worship; fold thy hands in prayer,

And be the dog that licks the foot of power! 
Nothing care I for Zeus; yea, less than naught! 
Let him do what he will, and sway the world 
His little hour; he has not long to lord it 
Among the Gods. 
Oh here here runner comes 
The upstart tyrant's lacquey! He'll bring news, 
A message, never doubt it, from his master.  (Enter HERMES.)  Hermes.
You, the sophistical rogue, the heart of gall, 
The renegade of heaven, to short-lived men 
Purveyor of prerogatives and tities, 
Fire-thief! Dost hear me? I've a word for thee. 
Thou'rt to declare-this is the Father's pleasure 
These marriage-feasts of thine, whereof thy tongue 
Rattles a-pace, and by the which his greatness 
Shall take a fall. And look you rede no riddles, 
But tell the truth, in each particular 
Exact. I am not to sweat for thee, Prometheus, 
Upon a double journey. And thou seest 
Zeus by thy dark defiance is not moved. 

PROMETHEUS A very solemn piece of insolence 
Spoken like an underling of the Gods! Ye are young! 
Ye are young! New come to power And ye suppose 
Your towered citadel Calamity 
Can never enter! Ah, and have not 
Seen from those pinnacles a two-fold fall 
Of tyrants? And the third, who his brief "now" 
Of lordship arrogates, I shall see yet 
By lapse most swift' most ignominious, 
Sink to perdition. And dost thou suppose 
I crouch and cower in reverence and awe 
To Gods of yesterday? I fail of that 
So much, the total all of space and time 
Bulks in between. Take thyself hence and count 
Thy toiling steps back by the way thou camest, 
In nothing wiser for thy questionings. 

HERMES This is that former stubbornness of thine 
That brought thee hither to foul anchorage. 

PROMETHEUS Mistake me not; I would not, if I might, 
Change my misfortunes for thy vassalage. 

HERMES Oh! better be the vassal of this rock 
Than born the trusty messenger of Zeus 

PROMETHEUS I answer insolence, as it deserves, 
With insolence. How else should it be answered? 

HERMES Surely; and, being in trouble, it is plain 
You revel in your plight. 

PROMETHEUS Revel, forsooth! 
I would my enemies might hold such revels 
And thou amongst the first. 

HERMES Dost thou blame me 
For thy misfortunes? 

PROMETHEUS I hate all the Gods, 
Because, having received good at my hands, 
They have rewarded me with evil. 
Proves thee stark mad! 

HERMES This proves thee stark mad! 

PROMETHEUS Mad as you please, if hating 
Your enemies is madness 

HERMES Were all well 
With thee, thou'dst be insufferable! 

PROMETHEUS Alas! 

HERMES Alas, that Zeus knows not that word, Alas! 

PROMETHEUS But ageing Time teacheth all knowledge. 

HERMES Time 
Hath not yet taught thy rash, imperious will 
Over wild impulse to win mastery. 

PROMETHEUS Nay: had Time taught me that, I had not stooped

To bandy words with such a slave as thou. 

HERMES This, then, is all thine answer: thou'lt not 
One syllable of what our Father asks. 

PROMETHEUS Oh, that I were a debtor to his kindness! 
I would requite him to the uttermost! 

HERMES A cutting speech! You take me for a boy 
Whom you may taunt and tease. 

PROMETHEUS Why art thou not 
A boy-a very booby-to suppose 
Thou wilt get aught from me? There is no wrong 
However shameful, nor no shift of malice 
Whereby Zeus shall persuade me to unlock 
My lips until these shackles be cast loose. 
Therefore let lightning leap with smoke and flame, 
And all that is be beat and tossed together, 
With whirl of feathery snowflakes and loud crack 
Of subterranean thunder; none of these 
Shall bend my will or force me to disclose 
By whom 'tis fated he shall fall from power. 

HERMES What good can come of this? Think yet again! 

PROMETHEUS I long ago have thought and long ago 
Determined. 

HERMES Patience! patience! thou rash fool 
Have so much patience as to school thy mind 
To a right judgment in thy present troubles. 

PROMETHEUS Lo, I am rockfast, and thy words are wave 
That weary me in vain. Let not the thought 
Enter thy mind, that I in awe of Zeus 
Shall change my nature for a girl's, or beg 
The Loathed beyond all loathing-with my hands 
Spread out in woman's fashion-to cast loose 
These bonds; from that I am utterly removed. 

HERMES I have talked much, yet further not my purpose; 
For thou art in no whit melted or moved 
By my prolonged entreaties: like a colt 
New to the harness thou dost back and Plunge. 
Snap at thy bit and fight against the rein. 
And yet thy confidence is in a straw; 
For stubbornness, if one be in the wrong, 
Is in itself weaker than naught at all. 
See now, if thou wilt not obey my words, 
What storm, what triple-crested wave of woe 
Unshunnable shall come upon thee. First, 
This rocky chasm shall the Father split 
With earthquake thunder and his burning bolt, 
And he shall hide thy form, and thou shalt hang 
Bolt upright, dandled in the rock's rude arms. 
Nor till thou hast completed thy long term 
Shalt thou come back into the light; and then 
The hound of Zeus, the tawny eagle, 
Shall violently fall upon thy flesh 
And rend it as 'twere rags; and every day 
And all day long shall thine unbidden guest 
Sit at thy table, feasting on thy liver 
Till he hath gnawn it black. Look for no term 
To such an agony till there stand forth 
Among the Gods one who shall take upon him 
Thy sufferings and consent to enter hell 
Far from the light of Sun, yea, the deep pit 
And mirk of Tartarus, for thee. Be advised; 
This is not stuffed speech framed to frighten the 
But woeful truth. For Zeus knows not to lie 

CHORUS To our mind 
The words of Hermes fail not of the mark. 
For he enjoins thee to let self-will go 
And follow after prudent counsels. Him 
Harken; for error in the wise is shame. 

PROMETHEUS These are stale tidings I foreknew; 
Therefore, since suffering is the due 
A foe must pay his foes, 
Let curled lightnings clasp and clash 
And close upon my limbs: loud crash 
The thunder, and fierce throes 
Of savage winds convulse calm air: 
The embowelled blast earth's roots uptear 
And toss beyond its bars, 
The rough surge, till the roaring deep 
In one devouring deluge sweep 
The pathway of the stars 
Finally, let him fling my form 
Down whirling gulfs, the central storm 
Of being; let me lie 
Plunged in the black Tartarean gloom; 
Yet-yet-his sentence shall not doom 
This deathless self to die! 

HERMES These are the workings of a brain 
More than a little touched; the vein 
Of voluble ecstasy! 
Surely he wandereth from the way, 
His reason lost, who thus can pray 
A mouthing mad man he! 
Therefore, O ye who court his fate, 
Rash mourners-ere it be too late 
And ye indeed are sad 
For vengeance spurring hither fast- 
Hence! lest the bellowing thunderblast 
Like him should strike you mad I 

CHORUS Words which might work persuasion speak 
If thou must counsel me; nor seek 
Thus, like a stream in spate, 
To uproot mine honour. Dost thou dare 
Urge me to baseness! I will bear 
With him all blows of fate; 
For false forsakers I despise; 
At treachery my gorge doth rise: 
I spew it forth with hate! 

HERMES Only-with ruin on your track- 
Rail not at fortune; but look back 
And these my words recall; 
Neither blame Zeus that he hath sent 
Sorrow no warning word forewent! 
Ye labour for your fall 
With your own hands I Not by surprise 
Nor yet by stealth, but with clear eyes, 
Knowing the thing ye do, 
Ye walk into the yawning net 
That for the feet of is set 
And Ruin spreads for you.  (Exit.)  

PROMETHEUS The time is past for words; earth quakes 
Sensibly: hark! pent thunder rakes 
The depths, with bellowing din 
Of echoes rolling ever nigher: 
Lightnings shake out their locks of fire; 
The dust cones dance and spin; 
The skipping winds, as if possessed 
By faction-north, south, east and west, 
Puff at each other; sea 
And sky are shook together: Lo 
The swing and fury of the blow 
Wherewith Zeus smiteth me 
Sweepeth apace, and, visibly, 
To strike my heart with fear. See, see, 
Earth, awful Mother! Air, 
That shedd'st from the revolving sky 
On all the light they see thee by, 
What bitter wrongs I bear!  (The scene closes with earthquake and
thunder, in the midst of which PROMETHEUS and the DAUGHTERS OF OCEANUS
sink into the abyss.) THEEND ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Within the Citadel of Thebes. There is an altar with the statues of
several gods visible. A crowd of citizens are present as ETEOCLES
enters with his attendants.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

ETEOCLES Clansmen of Cadmus, at the signal given 
By time and season must the ruler speak 
Who sets the course and steers the ship of State 
With hand upon the tiller, and with eye 
Watchful against the treachery of sleep. 
For if all go aright, thank Heaven, men say, 
But if adversely-which may God forefend!- 
One name on many lips, from street to street, 
Would bear the bruit and rumour of the time, 
Down witk Eteocles!-a clamorous curse, 
A dirge of ruin. May averting Zeus 
Make good his title here, in Cadmus' hold! 
You it beseems now-boys unripened yet 
To lusty manhood, men gone past the prime 
And increase of the full begetting seed, 
And those whom youth and manhood well combined 
Array for action-all to rise in aid 
Of city, shrines, and altars of all powers 
Who guard our land; that ne'er, to end of time, 
Be blotted out the sacred service due 
To our sweet mother-land and to her brood. 
For she it was who to their guest-right called 
Your waxing youth, was patient of the toil, 
And cherished you on the land's gracious lap, 
Alike to plant the hearth and bear the shield 
In loyal service, for an hour like this. 
Mark now! until to-day, luck rules our scale; 
For we, though long beleaguered, in the main 
Have with our sallies struck the foemen hard. 
But now the seer, the feeder of the birds 
(Whose art unerring and prophetic skill 
Of ear and mind divines their utterance 
Without the lore of fire interpreted) 
Foretelleth, by the mastery of his art, 
That now an onset of Achaea's host 
Is by a council of the night designed 
To fall in double strength upon our walls. 
Up and away, then, to the battlements, 
The gates, the bulwarks! don your panoplies, 
Array you at the breast-work, take your stand 
On the floorings of the towers, and with good heart 
Stand firm for sudden sallies at the gates, 
Nor hold too heinous a respect for hordes 
Sent on you from afar: some god will guard! 
I too, for shrewd espial of their camp, 
Have sent forth scouts, and confidence is mine 
They will not fail nor tremble at their task, 
And, with their news, I fear no foeman's guile.  (A Spy enters.)

THE SPY Eteocles, high king of Cadmus' folk, 
I stand here with news certified and sure 
From Argos' camp, things by myself descried. 
Seven warriors yonder, doughty chiefs of might, 
Into the crimsoned concave of a shield 
Have shed a bull's blood, and, with hands immersed 
Into the gore of sacrifice, have sworn 
By Ares, lord of fight, and by thy name, 
Blood-lapping Terror, Let our oath be heard- 
Either to raze the walls, make void the hold 
Of Cadmus-strive his children as they may- 
Or, dying here, to make the foemen's land 
With blood impasted. Then, as memory's gift 
Unto their parents at the far-off home, 
Chaplets they hung upon Adrastus' car, 
With eyes tear-dropping, but no word of moan. 
For their steeled spirit glowed with high resolve, 
As lions pant, with battle in their eyes. 
For them, no weak alarm delays the clear 
Issues of death or life! I parted thence 
Even as they cast the lots, how each should lead, 
Against which gate, his serried company. 
Rank then thy bravest, with what speed thou may'st, 
Hard by the gates, to dash on them, for now, 
Full-armed, the onward ranks of Argos come! 
The dust whirls up, and from their panting steeds 
White foamy flakes like snow bedew the plain. 
Thou therefore, chieftain! like a steersman skilled, 
Enshield the city's bulwarks, ere the blast 
Of war comes darting on them! hark, the roar 
Of the great landstorm with its waves of men 
Take Fortune by the forelock! for the rest, 
By yonder dawn-light will I scan the field 
Clear and aright, and surety of my word 
Shall keep thee scatheless of the coming storm. 

ETEOCLES O Zeus and Earth and city-guarding gods, 
And thou, my father's Curse, of baneful might, 
Spare ye at least this town, nor root it up, 
By violence of the foemen, stock and stem! 
For here, from home and hearth, rings Hellas' tongue. 
Forbid that e'er the yoke of slavery 
Should bow this land of freedom, Cadmus' hold! 
Be ye her help! your cause I plead with mine- 
A city saved doth honour to her gods!  (ETEOCLES, his attendants and
most of the crowd go out. The CHORUS OF THEBAN WOMEN enters. They
appear terror-stricken.)  

CHORUS  (singing) I wail in the stress of my terror, and shrill is
my cry of despair. 
The foemen roll forth from their camp as a billow, and onward they
bear! 
Their horsemen are swift in the forefront, the dust rises up to the
sky, 
A signal, though speechless, of doom, a herald more clear than a cry!

Hoof-trampled, the land of my love bears onward the din to mine ears.

As a torrent descending a mountain, it thunders and echoes and nears!

The doom is unloosened and cometh! O kings and O queens of high

Heaven, 
Prevail that it fall not upon us! the sign for their onset is given-

They stream to the walls from without, white-shielded and keen for
the fray. 
The rush of their feet? to what shrine shall I bow me in terror and
pray?  (They rush to pray to the gods.)  O gods high-throned in bliss,
we must crouch at the shrines in your home! 
Not here must we tarry and wail: shield clashes on shield as they
come 
And now, even now is the hour for the robes and the chaplets of prayer!

Mine eyes feel the flash of the sword, the clang is instinct with
the spear! 
Is thy hand set against us, O Ares, in ruin and wrath to o'erwhelm

Thine own immemorial land, O god of the golden helm? 
Look down upon us, we beseech thee, on the land that thou lovest of
old. 

(strophe 1)

And ye, O protecting gods, in pity your people behold! 
Yea, save us, the maidenly troop, from the doom and despair of the
slave, 
For the crests of the foemen come onward, their rush is the rush of
a wave 
Rolled on by the War-god's breath! almighty one, hear us and save

From the grasp of the Argives' might! to the ramparts of Cadmus they
crowd, 
And, clenched in the teeth of the steeds, the bits clink horror aloud

And seven high chieftains of war, with spear and with panoply bold,

Are set, by the law of the lot, to storm the seven gates of our hold!

(antistrophe 1)

Be near and befriend us, O Pallas, the Zeus-born maiden of might!

O lord of the steed and the sea, be thy trident uplifted to smite

In eager desire of the fray, Poseidon! and Ares come down,

In fatherly presence revealed, to rescue Harmonia's town!

Thine too, Aphrodite, we are! thou art mother and queen of our race,

To thee we cry out in our need, from thee let thy children have grace!

Ye too, to scare back the foe, be your cry as a wolf's howl wild,

Thou, O the wolf-lord, and thou, of she-wolf Leto the child!

(strophe 2)

Woe and alack for the sound, for the rattle of cars to the wall,

And the creak of the griding axles! O Hera, to thee is our call!

Artemis, maiden beloved! the air is distraught with the spears,

And whither doth destiny drive us, and where is the goal of our fears?

(antistrophe 2)

The blast of the terrible stones on the ridge of our wall is not
stayed, 
At the gates is the brazen clash of the bucklers-Apollo to aid!

Thou too, O daughter of Zeus, who guidest the wavering fray

To the holy decision of fate, Athena! be with us to-day!

Come down to the sevenfold gates and harry the foemen away!

(strophe 3)

O gods and O sisters of gods, our bulwark and guard! we beseech

That ye give not our war-worn hold to a rabble of alien speech!

List to the call of the maidens, the hands held up for the right,

(antistrophe 3)

Be near us, protect us, and show that the city is dear in your sight!

Have heed for her sacrifice holy, and thought of her offerings take,

Forget not her love and her worship, be near her and smite for her
sake!  (ETEOCLES and his retinue re-enter.)  

ETEOCLES  (addressing the CHORUS) Hark to my question, things detestable!

Is this aright and for the city's weal, 
And helpful to our army thus beset, 
That ye before the statues of our gods 
Should fling yourselves, and scream and shriek your fears?

Immodest, uncontrolled! Be this my lot- 
Never in troublous nor in peaceful days 
To dwell with aught that wears a female form! 
Where womankind has power, no man can house, 
Where womankind feeds panic, ruin rules 
Alike in house and city! Look you now- 
Your flying feet, and rumour of your fears, 
Have spread a soulless panic on our walls, 
And they without do go from strength to strength, 
And we within make breach upon ourselves! 
Such fate it brings, to house with womankind. 
Therefore if any shall resist my rule 
Or man, or woman, or some sexless thing- 
The vote of sentence shall decide their doom, 
And stones of execution, past escape, 
Shall finish all. Let not a woman's voice 
Be loud in council! for the things without, 
A man must care; let women keep within- 
Even then is mischief all too probable! 
Hear ye? or speak I to unheeding ears? 

CHORUS  (chanting) Ah, but I shudder, child of Oedipus!

I heard the clash and clang! 
The axles rolled and rumbled; woe to us, 
Fire-welded bridles rang! 
Say-when a ship is strained and deep in brine, 
Did eer a seaman mend his chance, who left 
The helm, t' invoke the image at the prow? 

CHORUS  (chanting) Ah, but I fled to the shrines, I called to our
helpers on high, 
When the stone-shower roared at the portals! 
I sped to the temples aloft, and loud was my call and my cry,

Look down and deliver, Immortals! 

ETEOCLES Ay, pray amain that stone may vanquish steel! 
Where not that grace of gods? ay, ay-methinks, 
When cities fall, the gods go forth from them! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Ah, let me die, or ever I behold 
The gods go forth, in conflagration dire! 
The foemen's rush and raid, and all our hold 
Wrapt in the burning fire! 

ETEOCLES Cry not on Heaven, in impotent debate! 
What saith the saw?-Good saving Strength, in verity, 
Out of Obedience breeds the babe Prosperity. 

CHORUS  (chanting) 'Tis true: yet stronger is the power divine,

And oft, when man's estate is overbowed 
With bitter pangs, disperses from his eyne 
The heavy, hanging cloud! 

ETEOCLES Let men with sacrifice and augury 
Approach the gods, when comes the tug of war: 
Alaids must be silent and abide within. 

CHORUS  (chanting) By grace of the gods we hold it, a city untamed
of the spear, 
And the battlement wards from the wall the foe and his aspect of fear!

What need of displeasure herein? 

ETEOCLES Ay, pay thy vows to Heaven; I grudge them not,

But-so thou strike no fear into our men- 
Have calm at heart, nor be too much afraid. 
Alack, it is fresh in mine ears, the clamour and crash of the fray,

And up to our holiest height I sped on my timorous way, 
Bewildered, beset by the din! 

ETEOCLES Now, if ye hear the bruit of death or wounds, 
Give not yourselves o'ermuch to shriek and scream, 
For Ares ravins upon human flesh. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Ah, but the snorting of the steeds I hear!

ETEOCLES Then, if thou hearest, hear them not too well 

LEADER Hark, the earth rumbles, as they close us round!

ETEOCLES Enough if I am here, with plans prepared. 

LEADER Alack, the battering at the gates is loud! 

ETEOCLES Peace! stay your tongue, or else the town may hear!

LEADER O warders of the walls, betray them not! 

ETEOCLES Beshrew your cries! in silence face your fate.

LEADER Gods of our city, see me not enslaved! 

ETEOCLES On me, on all, thy cries bring slavery. 

LEADER Zeus, strong to smite, turn upon foes thy blow! 

ETEOCLES Zeus, what a curse are women, wrought by thee!

LEADER Weak wretches, even as men, when cities fall. 
What! clasping gods, yet voicing thy despair? 

LEADER In the sick heart, fear maketh prey of speech. 

ETEOCLES Light is the thing I ask thee-do my will! 

LEADER Ask swiftly: swiftly shall I know my power. 

ETEOCLES Silence, weak wretch! nor put thy friends in fear.

LEADER I speak no more: the general fate be mine! 

ETEOCLES I take that word as wiser than the rest. 
Nay, more: these images possess thy will- 
Pray, in their strength, that Heaven be on our side! 
Then hear my prayers withal, and then ring out 
The female triumph-note, thy privilege- 
Yea, utter forth the usage Hellas knows, 
The cry beside the altars, sounding clear 
Encouragement to friends, alarm to foes. 
But I unto all gods that guard our walls, 
Lords of the plain or warders of the mart 
And to Ismenus' stream and Dirce's rills, 
I swear, if Fortune smiles and saves our town, 
That we will make our altars reek with blood 
Of sheep and kine, shed forth unto the gods, 
And with victorious tokens front our fanes- 
Corslets and casques that once our foemen wore, 
Spear-shattered now-to deck these holy homes! 
Be such thy vows to Heaven-away with sighs, 
Away with outcry vain and barbarous, 
That shall avail not, in a general doom! 
But I will back, and, with six chosen men 
Myself the seventh, to confront the foe 
In this great aspect of a poised war, 
Return and plant them at the sevenfold gates, 
Or e'er the prompt and clamorous battle-scouts 
Haste to inflame our counsel with the need.  (ETEOCLES and his retinue
go out.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

I mark his words, yet, dark and deep, 
My heart's alarm forbiddeth sleep! 
Close-clinging cares around my soul 
Enkindle fears beyond control, 
Presageful of what doom may fall 
From the great leaguer of the wall! 
So a poor dove is faint with fear 
For her weak nestlings, while anew 
Glides on the snaky ravisher! 
In troop and squadron, hand on hand, 
They climb and throng, and hemmed we stand, 
While on the warders of our town 
The flinty shower comes hurtling down! 
Gods born of Zeus! put forth your might 
For Cadmus' city, realm, and right! 

(antistrophe 1)

What nobler land shall e'er be yours, 
If once ye give to hostile powers 
The deep rich soil, and Dirce's wave, 
The nursing stream, Poseidon gave 
And Tethys' children? Up and save! 
Cast on the ranks that hem us round 
A deadly panic, make them fling 
Their arms in terror on the ground, 
And die in carnage! thence shall spring 
High honour for our clan and king! 
Come at our wailing cry, and stand 
As throned sentries of our land! 

(strophe 2)

For pity and sorrow it were that this immemorial town 
Should sink to be slave of the spear, to dust and to ashes gone down,

By the gods of Achaean worship and arms of Achaean might

Sacked and defiled and dishonoured, its women the prize of the fight-

That, haled by the hair as a steed, their mantles dishevelled and
torn, 
The maiden and matron alike should pass to the wedlock of scorn!

I hear it arise from the city, the manifold wail of despair-

Woe, woe for the doom that shall be-as in grasp of the foeman they
fare! 

(antistrophe 2)

For a woe and a weeping it is, if the maiden inviolate flower

Is plucked by the foe in his might, not culled in the bridal bower!

Alas for the hate and the horror-how say it?-less hateful by far

Is the doom to be slain by the sword, hewn down in the carnage of
war! 
For wide, ah! wide is the woe when the foeman has mounted the wall;

There is havoc and terror and flame, and the dark smoke broods over
all, 
And wild is the war-god's breath, as in frenzy of conquest he springs,

And pollutes with the blast of his lips the glory of holiest things!

(strophe 3)

Up to the citadel rise clash and din, 
The war-net closes in, 
The spear is in the heart: with blood imbrued 
Young mothers wail aloud, 
For children at their breast who scream and die! 
And boys and maidens fly, 
Yet scape not the pursuer, in his greed 
To thrust and grasp and feed! 
Robber with robber joins, each calls his mate 
Unto the feast of hate- 
The banquet, lo! is spread-seize, rend, and tear! 
No need to choose or share! 

(antistrophe 3)

And all the wealth of earth to waste is poured- 
A sight by all abhorred! 
The grieving housewives eye it; heaped and blent, 
Earth's boons are spoiled and spent, 
And waste to nothingness; and O alas, 
Young maids, forlorn ye pass- 
Fresh horror at your hearts-beneath the power 
Of those who crop the flower! 
Ye own the ruffian ravisher for lord, 
And night brings rites abhorred! 
Woe, woe for you! upon your grief and pain 
There comes a fouler stain.  (On one side the SPY enters; on the other,
ETEOCLES and the SIX CHAMPIONS.)  

LEADER OF THE FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Look, friends! methinks the scout,
who parted hence 
To spy upon the foemen, comes with news, 
His feet as swift as wafting chariot-wheels. 

LEADER OF THE SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Ay, and our king, the son of Oedipus,

Comes prompt to time, to learn the spy's report- 
His heart is fainer than his foot is fast! 

THE SPY Well have I scanned the foe, and well can say 
Unto which chief, by lot, each gate is given. 
Tydeus already with his onset-cry 
Storms at the gate called Proetides; but him 
The seer Amphiaraus holds at halt, 
Nor wills that he should cross Ismenus' ford, 
Until the sacrifices promise fair. 
But Tydeus, mad with lust of blood and broil, 
Like to a cockatrice at noontide hour, 
Hisses out wrath and smites with scourge of tongue 
The prophet-son of Oecleus-Wise thou art, 
Faint against war, and holding back from death! 
With such revilings loud upon his lips 
He waves the triple plumes that o'er his helm 
Float overshadowing, as a courser's mane; 
And at his shield's rim, terror in their tone, 
Clang and reverberate the brazen bells. 
And this proud sign, wrought on his shield, he bears,- 
The vault of heaven, inlaid with blazing stars; 
And, for the boss, the bright moon glows at full, 
The eye of night, the first and lordliest star. 
Thus with high-vaunted armour, madly bold, 
He clamours by the stream-bank, wild for war, 
As a steed panting grimly on his bit, 
Held in and chafing for the trumpet's bray! 
Whom wilt thou set against him? when the gates 
Of Proetus yield, who can his rush repel? 

ETEOCLES To me, no blazon on a foeman's shield 
Shall e'er present a fear! such pointed threats 
Are powerless to wound; his plumes and bells, 
Without a spear, are snakes without a sting. 
Nay, more-that pageant of which thou tellest- 
The nightly sky displayed, ablaze with stars, 
Upon his shield, palters with double sense 
One headstrong fool will find its truth anon! 
For, if night fall upon his eyes in death, 
Yon vaunting blazon will its own truth prove, 
And he is prophet of his folly's fall. 
Mine shall it be, to pit against his power 
The loyal son of Astacus, as guard 
To hold the gateways-a right valiant soul, 
Who has in heed the throne of Modesty 
And loathes the speech of Pride, and evermore 
Shrinks from the base, but knows no other fear. 
He springs by stock from those whom Ares spared, 
The men called Sown, a right son of the soil, 
And Melanippus styled. Now, what his arm 
To-day shall do, rests with the dice of war, 
And Ares shall ordain it; but his cause 
Hath the true badge of Right, to urge him on 
To guard, as son, his motherland from wrong.  (MELANIPPUS goes out.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Then may the gods give fortune fair 
Unto our chief, sent forth to dare 
War's terrible arbitrament! 
But ah! when champions wend away, 
I shudder, lest, from out the fray, 
Only their blood-stained wrecks be sent! 

THE SPY Nay, let him pass, and the gods' help be his! 
Next, Capaneus comes on, by lot to lead 
The onset at the gates Electran styled: 
A giant be, more huge than Tydeus' self, 
And more than human in his arrogance- 
May fate forefend his threat against our walls! 
God willing, or unwilling-such his vaunt- 
I will lay waste this city; Pallas' self, 
Zeus's warrior maid, although she swoop to earth 
And plant her in my path, shall stay me not. 
And, for the flashes of the levin-bolt, 
He holds them harmless as the noontide rays. 
Mark, too, the symbol on his shield-a man 
Scornfully weaponless but torch in hand, 
And the flame glows witbin his grasp, prepared 
For ravin: lo, the legend, wrought in words, 
Fire for the city bring I, flares in gold! 
Against such wight, send forth-yet whom? what man 
Will front that vaunting figure and not fear? 

ETEOCLES Aha, this profits also, gain on gain! 
In sooth, for mortals, the tongue's utterance 
Bewrays unerringly a foolish pride! 
Hither stalks Capaneus, with vaunt and threat 
Defying god-like powers, equipt to act, 
And, mortal though he be, he strains his tongue 
In folly's ecstasy, and casts aloft 
High swelling words against the ears of Zeus. 
Right well I trust-if justice grants the word- 
That, by the might of Zeus, a bolt of flame 
In more than semblance shall descend on him. 
Against his vaunts, though reckless, I have set, 
To make assurance sure, a warrior stern- 
Strong Polyphontes, fervid for the fray;- 
A sturdy bulwark, he, by grace of Heaven 
And favour of his champion Artemis! 
Say on, who holdeth the next gate in ward?  (POLYPHONTES goes out.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Perish the wretch whose vaunt affronts our home!

On him the red bolt come, 
Ere to the maiden bowers his way he cleave, 
To ravage and bereave! 

THE SPY I will say on. Eteoclus is third- 
To him it fell, what time the third lot sprang 
O'er the inverted helmet's brazen rim, 
To dash his stormers on Neistae gate. 
He wheels his mares, who at their frontlets chafe 
And yearn to charge upon the gates amain. 
They snort the breath of pride, and, filled therewith, 
Their nozzles whistle with barbaric sound. 
High too and haughty is his shield's device- 
An armed man who climbs, from rung to rung, 
A scaling ladder, up a hostile wall, 
Afire to sack and slay; and he too cries 
(By letters, full of sound, upon the shield) 
Not Ares' self shall cast me from the wall. 
Look to it, send, against this man, a man 
Strong to debar the slave's yoke from our town. 

ETEOCLES  (pointing to MEGAREUS) Send will I-even this man, with
luck to aid-  (MEGAREUS departs as soon as he has been marked out.)
By his worth sent already, not by pride 
And vain pretence, is he. 'Tis Megareus, 
The child of Creon, of the Earth-sprung born! 
He will not shrink from guarding of the gates, 
Nor fear the maddened charger's frenzied neigh, 
But, if he dies, will nobly quit the score 
For nurture to the land that gave him birth, 
Or from the shield-side hew two warriors down- 
Eteoclus and the figure that he lifts- 
Ay, and the city pictured, all in one, 
And deck with spoils the temple of his sire! 
Announce the next pair, stint not of thy tongue! 

CHORUS  (chanting) O thou, the warder of my home, 
Grant, unto us, Fate's favouring tide, 
Send on the foemen doom! 
They fling forth taunts of frenzied pride, 
On them may Zeus with glare of vengeance come 

THE SPY Lo, next him stands a fourth and shouts amain, 
By Pallas Onca's portal, and displays 
A different challenge; 'tis Hippomedon! 
Huge the device that starts up from his targe 
In high relief; and, I deny it not, 
I shuddered, seeing how, upon the rim, 
It made a mighty circle round the shield- 
No sorry craftsman he, who wrought that work 
And clamped it all around the buckler's edge! 
The form was Typhon: from his glowing throat 
Rolled lurid smoke, spark-litten, kin of fire! 
The flattened edge-work, circling round the whole, 
Made strong support for coiling snakes that grew 
Erect above the concave of the shield: 
Loud rang the warrior's voice; inspired for war, 
He raves to slay, as doth a Bacchanal, 
His very glance a terror! of such wight 
Beware the onset! closing on the gates, 
He peals his vaunting and appalling cry! 

ETEOCLES Yet first our Pallas Onca-wardress she, 
Planting her foot hard by her gate-shall stand, 
The Maid against the ruffian, and repel 
His force, as from her brood the mother-bird 
Beats back the wintered serpent's venom'd fang. 
And next, by her, is Oenops' gallant son, 
Hyperbius, chosen to confront this foe, 
Ready to seek his fate at Fortune's shrine! 
In form, in valour, and in skill of arms, 
None shall gainsay him. See how wisely well 
Hermes hath set the brave against the strong! 
Confronted shall they stand, the shield of each 
Bearing the image of opposing gods: 
One holds aloft his Typhon breathing fire, 
But, on the other's shield, in symbol sits 
Zeus, calm and strong, and fans his bolt to flame- 
Zeus, seen of all, yet seen of none to fail! 
Howbeit, weak is trust reposed in Heaven- 
Yet are we upon Zeus' victorious side, 
The foe, with those he worsted-if in sooth 
Zeus against Typhon held the upper hand, 
And if Hyperbius (as well may hap 
When two such foes such diverse emblems bear) 
Have Zeus upon his shield, a saving sign.  (HYPERBIUS goes out.)

CHORUS  (chanting) High faith is mine that he whose shield

Bears, against Zeus, the thing of hate. 
The giant Typhon, thus revealed, 
A monster loathed of gods eterne 
And mortal men-this doom shall earn 
A shattered skull, before the gate! 

THE SPY Heaven send it so! A fifth assailant now 
Is set against our fifth, the northern, gate, 
Fronting the death-mound where Amphion lies 
The child of Zeus. This foeman vows his faith, 
Upon a mystic spear-head which he deems 
More holy than a godhead and more sure 
To find its mark than any glance of eye, 
That, will they, nill they, he will storm and sack 
The hold of the Cadmeans. Such his oath- 
His, the bold warrior, yet of childish years, 
A bud of beauty's foremost flower, the son 
Of Zeus and of the mountain maid. I mark 
How the soft down is waxing on his cheek, 
Thick and close-growing in its tender prime- 
In name, not mood, is he a maiden's child- 
Parthenopaeus; large and bright his eyes 
But fierce the wrath wherewith he fronts the gate: 
Yet not unheralded he takes his stand 
Before the portal; on his brazen shield, 
The rounded screen and shelter of his form, 
I saw him show the ravening Sphinx, the fiend 
That shamed our city-how it glared and moved, 
Clamped on the buckler, wrought in high relief! 
And in its claws did a Cadmean bear- 
Nor heretofore, for any single prey, 
Sped she aloft, through such a storm of darts 
As now awaits her. So our foe is here- 
Like, as I deem, to ply no stinted trade 
In blood and broil, but traffick as is meet 
In fierce exchange for his long wayfaring! 

ETEOCLES Ah, may they meet the doom they think to bring-

They and their impious vaunts-from those on high! 
So should they sink, hurled down to deepest death! 
This foe, at least, by thee Arcadian styled, 
Is faced by one who bears no braggart sign, 
But his hand sees to smite, where blows avail- 
Actor, own brother to Hyperbius! 
He will not let a boast without a blow 
Stream through our gates and nourish our despair, 
Nor give him way who on his hostile shield 
Bears the brute image of the loathly Sphinx! 
Blocked at the gate, she will rebuke the man 
Who strives to thrust her forward, when she feels 
Thick crash of blows, up to the city wall. 
With Heaven's goodwill, my forecast shall be true.  (ACTOR goes out.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Home to my heart the vaunting goes, 
And, quick with terror, on my head 
Rises my hair, at sound of those 
Who wildly, impiously rave! 
If gods there be, to them I plead- 
Give them to darkness and the grave. 

THE SPY Fronting the sixth gate stands another foe, 
Wisest of warriors, bravest among seers- 
Such must I name Amphiaraus: he, 
Set steadfast at the Homoloid gate, 
Berates strong Tydeus with reviling words- 
The man of blood, the bane of state and home 
To Argos, arch-allurer to all ill, 
Evoker of the Fury-fiend of hell, 
Death's minister, and counsellor of wrong 
Unto Adrastus in this fatal field. 
Ay, and with eyes upturned and mien of scorn 
He chides thy brother Polyneices to 
At his desert, and once and yet again 
Dwells hard and meaningly upon his name 
Where it saith glory yet importeth feud. 
Yea, such thou art in act, and such thy grace 
In sight of Heaven, and such in aftertime 
Thy fame, for lips and ears of mortal men! 
"He strove to sack the city of his sires 
And temples of her gods, and brought on her 
An alien armament of foreign foes. 
The fountain of maternal blood outpoured 
What power can staunck? even so, thy fatherland 
Once by thine ardent malice stormed and ta'en, 
Shall ne'er join force with thee." For me, I know 
It doth remain to let my blood enrich 
The border of this land that loves me not- 
Blood of a prophet, in a foreign grave! 
Now, for the battle! I foreknow my doom, 
Yet it shall be with honour. So he spake, 
The prophet, holding up his targe of bronze 
Wrought without blazon, to the ears of men 
Who stood around and heeded not his word. 
For on no bruit and rumour of great deeds, 
But on their doing, is his spirit set, 
And in his heart he reaps a furrow rich, 
Wherefrom the foison of good counsel springs. 
Against him, send brave heart and hand of might; 
For the god-lover is man's fiercest foe. 

ETEOCLES Out on the chance that couples mortal men, 
Linking the just and impious in one! 
In every issue, the one curse is this- 
Companionship with men of evil heart! 
A baneful harvest, let none gather it! 
The field of sin is rank, and brings forth death 
At whiles a righteous man who goes aboard 
With reckless mates, a horde of villainy, 
Dies by one death with that detested crew; 
At whiles the just man, joined with citizens 
Ruthless to strangers, recking nought of Heaven, 
Trapped, against nature, in one net with them, 
Dies by God's thrust and all-including blow. 
So will this prophet die, even Oecleus' child, 
Sage, just, and brave, and loyal towards Heaven, 
Potent in prophecy, but mated here 
With men of sin, too boastful to be wise! 
Long is their road, and they return no more, 
And, at their taking-off, by hard of Zeus, 
The prophet too shall take the downward way. 
He will not-so I deem-assail the gate- 
Not as through cowardice or feeble will, 
But as one knowing to what end shall be 
Their struggle in the battle, if indeed 
Fruit of fulfilment lie in Loxias' word. 
He speaketh not, unless to speak avails! 
Yet, for more surety, we will post a man, 
Strong Lasthenes, as warder of the gate, 
Stern to the foeman; he hath age's skill, 
Mated with youthful vigour, and an eye 
Forward, alert; swift too his hand, to catch 
The fenceless interval 'twixt shield and spear! 
Yet man's good fortune lies in hand of Heaven.  (LASTHENES goes out.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Unto our loyal cry, ye gods, give ear!

Save, save the city! turn away the spear, 
Send on the foemen fear! 
Outside the rampart fall they, rent and riven 
Beneath the bolt of heaven! 

THE SPY Last, let me name yon seventh antagonist, 
Thy brother's self, at the seventh portal set- 
Hear with what wrath he imprecates our doom, 
Vowing to mount the wall, though banished hence, 
And peal aloud the wild exulting cry- 
The town is ta'en-then clash his sword with thine, 
Giving and taking death in close embrace, 
Or, if thou 'scapest, flinging upon thee, 
As robber of his honour and his home, 
The doom of exile such as he has borne. 
So clamours he and so invokes the gods 
Who guard his race and home, to hear and heed 
The curse that sounds in Polyneices' name! 
He bears a round shield, fresh from forge and fire, 
And wrought upon it is a twofold sign- 
For lo, a woman leads decorously 
The figure of a warrior wrought in gold; 
And thus the legend runs-I Justice am, 
And I will bring the hero home again, 
To hold once more his place within this town, 
Once more to pace his sire's ancestral hall. 
Such are the symbols, by our foemen shown- 
Now make thine own decision, whom to send 
Against this last opponent! I have said- 
Nor canst thou in my tidings find a flaw- 
Thine is it, now, to steer the course aright. 

ETEOCLES Ah me, the madman, and the curse of Heaven 
And woe for us, the lamentable line 
Of Oedipus, and woe that in this house 
Our father's curse must find accomplishment! 
But now, a truce to tears and loud lament, 
Lest they should breed a still more rueful wail! 
As for this Polyneices, named too well, 
Soon shall we know how this device shall end- 
Whether the gold-wrought symbols on his shield, 
In their mad vaunting and bewildered pride, 
Shall guide him as a victor to his home! 
For had but justice, maiden-child of Zeus, 
Stood by his act and thought, it might have been! 
Yet never, from the day he reached the light 
Out of the darkness of his mother's womb, 
Never in childhood, nor in youthful prime, 
Nor when his chin was gathering its beard, 
Hath justice hailed or claimed him as her own. 
Therefore I deem not that she standeth now 
To aid him in this outrage on his home! 
Misnamed, in truth, were justice, utterly, 
If to impiety she lent her hand. 
Sure in this faith, I will myself go forth 
And match me with him; who hath fairer claim? 
Ruler, against one fain to snatch the rule, 
Brother with brother matched, and foe with foe, 
Will I confront the issue. To the wall! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O thou true heart, O child of Oedipus,

Be not, in wrath, too like the man whose name 
Murmurs an evil omen! 'Tis enough 
That Cadmus' clan should strive with Arges' host, 
For blood there is that can atone that stain! 
But-brother upon brother dealing death- 
Not time itself can expiate the sin! 

ETEOCLES If man find hurt, yet clasp his honour still, 
'Tis well; the dead have honour, nought beside. 
Hurt, with dishonour, wins no word of praise! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Ah, what is thy desire? 
Let not the lust and ravin of the sword 
Bear thee adown the tide accursed, abhorred! 
Fling off thy passion's rage, thy spirit's prompting dire!

ETEOCLES Nay-since the god is urgent for our doom, 
Let Laius' house, by Phoebus loathed and scorned, 
Follow the gale of destiny, and win 
Its great inheritance, the gulf of hell! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Ruthless thy craving is- 
Craving for kindred and forbidden blood 
To be outpoured-a sacrifice imbrued 
With sin, a bitter fruit of murderous enmities! 

ETEOCLES Yea, my own father's fateful Curse proclaims- 
A ghastly presence, and her eyes are dry- 
Strike! honour is the prize, not life prolonged! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Ah, be not urged of her! for none shall dare

To call thee coward, in thy throned estate! 
Will not the Fury in her sable pal 
Pass outward from these halls, what time the gods 
Welcome a votive offering from our hands? 

ETEOCLES The gods! long since they hold us in contempt,

Scornful of gifts thus offered by the lost! 
Why should we fawn and flinch away from doom? 

CHORUS  (chanting) Now, when it stands beside thee! for its power

May, with a changing gust of milder mood, 
Temper the blast that bloweth wild and rude 
And frenzied, in this hour! 

ETEOCLES Ay, kindled by the curse of Oedipus- 
All too prophetic, out of dreamland came 
The vision, meting out our sire's estate! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Heed women's voices, though thou love them not!

ETEOCLES Say aught that may avail, but stint thy words.

LEADER Go not thou forth to guard the seventh gate! 

ETEOCLES Words shall not blunt the edge of my resolve. 

LEADER Yet the god loves to let the weak prevail. 

ETEOCLES That to a swordsman, is no welcome word! 

LEADER Shall thine own brother's blood be victory's palm?

ETEOCLES Ill which the gods have sent thou canst no-shun!  (ETEOCLES
goes out.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

I shudder in dread of the power, abhorred by the gods of high heaven,

The ruinous curse of the home till roof-tree and rafter be riven!

Too true are the visions of ill, too true the fulfilment they bring

To the curse that was spoken of old by the frenzy and wrath of the
king! 
Her will is the doom of the children, and Discord is kindled amain,

(antistrophe 1)

And strange is the Lord of Division, who cleaveth the birthright
in twain,- 
The edged thing, born of the north, the steel that is ruthless and
keen, 
Dividing in bitter division the lot of the children of teen!

Not the wide lowland around, the realm of their sire, shall they have,

Yet enough for the dead to inherit, the pitiful space of a grave!

(strophe 2)

Ah, but when kin meets kin, when sire and child, 
Unknowing, are defiled 
By shedding common blood, and when the pit 
Of death devoureth it, 
Drinking the clotted stain, the gory dye- 
Who, who can purify? 
Who cleanse pollution, where the ancient bane 
Rises and reeks again? 

(antistrophe 2)

Whilome in olden days the sin was wrought, 
And swift requital brought- 
Yea on the children of the child came still 
New heritage of ill! 
For thrice Apollo spoke this word divine, 
From Delphi's central shrine, 
To Laius-Die thou childless! thus alone 
Can the land's weal be won! 

(strophe 3)

But vainly with his wife's desire he strove, 
And gave himself to love, 
Begetting Oedipus, by whom he died, 
The fateful parricide! 
The sacred seed-plot, his own mother's womb, 
He sowed, his house's doom, 
A root of blood! by frenzy lured, they came 
Unto their wedded shame. 

(antistrophe 3)

And now the waxing surge, the wave of fate, 
Rolls on them, triply great- 
One billow sinks, the next towers, high and dark, 
Above our city's bark- 
Only the narrow barrier of the wal 
Totters, as soon to fall; 
And, if our chieftains in the storm go down, 
What chance can save the town? 

(strophe 4)

Curses, inherited from long ago, 
Bring heavy freight of woe: 
Rich stores of merchandise o'erload the deck, 
Near, nearer comes the wreck- 
And all is lost, cast out upon the wave, 
Floating, with none to save! 

(antistrophe 4)

Whom did the gods, whom did the chief of men, 
Whom did each citizen 
In crowded concourse, in such honour hold, 
As Oedipus of old, 
When the grim fiend, that fed on human prey, 
He took from us away? 

(strophe 5)

But when, in the fulness of days, he knew of his bridal unblest,

A twofold horror he wrought, in the frenzied despair of his breast-

Debarred from the grace of the banquet, the service of goblets of
gold 
He flung on his children a curse for the splendour they dared to withhold.

(antistrophe 5)

A curse prophetic and bitter-The glory of wealth and of pride,

With iron, not gold, in your hands, ye shall come, at the last, to
divide! 
Behold, how a shudder runs through me, lest now, in the fulness of
time, 
The house-fiend awake and return, to mete out the measure of crime!
(THE SPY enters.)  

THE SPY Take heart, ye daughters whom your mothers' milk

Made milky-hearted! lo, our city stands, 
Saved from the yoke of servitude: the vaunts 
Of overweening men are silent now, 
And the State sails beneath a sky serene, 
Nor in the manifold and battering waves 
Hath shipped a single surge, and solid stands 
The rampart, and the gates are made secure, 
Each with a single champion's trusty guard. 
So in the main and at six gates we hold 
A victory assured; but, at the seventh, 
The god that on the seventh day was born, 
Royal Apollo, hath ta'en up his rest 
To wreak upon the sons of Oedipus 
Their grandsire's wilfulness of long ago. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS What further woefulness besets our home?

THE SPY The home stands safe-but ah, the princes twain-

LEADER Who? what of them? I am distraught with fear. 

THE SPY Hear now, and mark! the sons of Oedipus- 

LEADER Ah, my prophetic soul! I feel their doom. 

THE SPY Have done with questions!-with I-with their lives crushed
out- 

LEADER Lie they out yonder? the full horror speak! 
Did hands meet hands more close than brotherly? 
Came fate on each. and in the selfsame hour? 

THE SPY Yea, blotting out the lineage ill-starred! 
Now mix your exultation and your tears, 
Over a city saved, the while its lords, 
Twin leaders of the fight, have parcelled out 
With forged arbitrament of Scythian steel 
The full division of their fatherland, 
And, as their father's imprecation bade, 
Shall have their due of land, a twofold grave. 
So is the city saved; the earth has drunk 
Blood of twin princes, by each other slain. 

CHORUS  (chanting) O mighty Zeus and guardian powers, 
The strength and stay of Cadmus' towers! 
Shall I send forth a joyous cry, 
Hail to the lord of weal renewed? 
Or weep the misbegotten twain, 
Born to a fatal destiny 
Each numbered now among the slain, 
Each dying in ill fortitude, 
Each truly named, each child of feud? 
O dark and all-prevailing ill, 
That broods o'er Oedipus and all his line, 
Numbing my heart with mortal chill! 
Ah me, this song of mine, 
Which, Thyad-like, I woke, now falleth still, 
Or only tells of doom, 
And echoes round a tomb! 
Dead are they, dead! in their own blood they lie 
Ill-omened the concent that hails our victory! 
The curse a father on his children spake 
Hath faltered not, nor failed! 
Nought, Laius! thy stubborn choice availed- 
First to beget, then, in the after day 
And for the city's sake, 
The child to slay! 
For nought can blunt nor mar 
The speech oracular! 
Children of teen! by disbelief ye erred- 
Yet in wild weeping came fulfilment of the word!  (ANTIGONE and ISMENE
approach, with a train of mourners. bearing the bodies of ETEOCLES
and POLYNEICES.)  Look up, look forth! the doom is plain,

Nor spake the messenger in vain! 
A twofold sorrow, twofold strife- 
Each brave against a brother's life! 
In double doom hath sorrow come 
How shall I speak it?-on the home! 
Alas, my sisters! be your sighs the gale, 
The smiting of your brows the plash of oars, 
Wafting the boat, to Acheron's dim shores 
That passeth ever, with its darkened sail, 
On its uncharted voyage and sunless way, 
Far from thy beams, Apollo, god of day- 
The melancholy bark 
Bound for the common bourn, the harbour of the dark! 

Look up, look yonder! from the home 
Antigone, Ismene come, 
On the last, saddest errand bound, 
To chant a dirge of doleful sound, 
With agony of equal pain 
Above their brethren slain! 
Their sister-bosoms surely swell, 
Heart with rent heart according well 
In grief for those who fought and fell! 
Yet-ere they utter forth their woe 
We must awake the rueful strain 
To vengeful powers, in realms below, 
And mourn hell's triumph o'er the slain! 

Alas! of all, the breast who bind,- 
Yea, all the race of womankind- 
O maidens, ye are most bereaved! 
For you, for you the tear-drops start- 
Deem that in truth, and undeceived, 
Ye hear the sorrows of my heart!  (To the dead)  Children of bitterness,
and sternly brave- 
One, proud of heart against persuasion's voice, 
One, against exile proof! ye win your choice- 
Each in your fatherland, a separate grave! 
Alack, on house and heritage 
They brought a baneful doom, and death for wage! 
One strove through tottering walls to force his way, 
One claimed, in bitter arrogance, the sway, 
And both alike, even now and here, 
Have closed their suit, with steel for arbiter! 
And lo, the Fury-fiend of Oedipus, their sire, 
Hath brought his curse to consummation dire 
Each in the left side smitten, see them laid- 
The children of one womb, 
Slain by a mutual doom! 
Alas, their fate! the combat murderous, 
The horror of the house, 
The curse of ancient bloodshed, now repaid! 
Yea, deep and to the heart the deathblow fell, 
Edged by their feud ineffable- 
By the grim curse, their sire did imprecate 
Discord and deadly hate! 
Hark, how the city and its towers make moan- 
How the land mourns that held them for its own! 
Fierce greed and fell division did they blend, 
Till death made end! 
They strove to part the heritage in twain, 
Giving to each a gain- 
Yet that which struck the balance in the strife, 
The arbitrating sword, 
By those who loved the twain is held abhorred- 
Loathed is the god of death, who sundered each from life!

Here, by the stroke of steel, behold! they lie- 
And rightly may we cry 
Beside their fathers, let them here be laid- 
Iron gave their doom, witk iron their graves be made- 
A lack, the slaying sword, alack, th' entombing spade! 
Alas, a piercing shriek, a rending groan, 
A cry unfeigned of sorrow felt at heart! 
With shuddering of grief, with tears that start, 
With wailful escort, let them hither come- 
For one or other make divided moan! 
No light lament of pity mixed with gladness, 
But with true tears, poured from the soul of sadness, 
Over the princes dead and their bereaved home 
Say we, above these brethren dead, 
On citizen, on foreign foe, 
Brave was their rush, and stern their blow- 
Now, lowly are they laid! 
Beyond all women upon earth 
Woe, woe for her who gave them birth! 
Unknowingly, her son she wed- 
The children of that marriage-bed, 
Each in the self-same womb, were bred- 
Each by a brother's hand lies dead! 

Yea, from one seed they sprang, and by one fate 
Their heritage is desolate, 
The heart's division sundered claim from claim, 
And, from their feud, death came! 
Now is their hate allayed, 
Now is their life-stream shed, 
Ensanguining the earth with crimson dye- 
Lo, from one blood they sprang, and in one blood they lie!

A grievous arbiter was given the twain- 
The stranger from the northern main, 
The sharp, dividing sword, 
Fresh from the forge and fire 
The War-god treacherous gave ill award 
And brought their father's curse to a fulfilment dire! 
They have their portion-each his lot and doom, 
Given from the gods on high! 
Yea, the piled wealth of fatherland, for tomb, 
Shall underneath them lie! 
Alas, alas! with flowers of fame and pride 
Your home ye glorified; 
But, in the end, the Furies gathered round 
With chants of boding sound, 
Shrieking, In wild defeat and disarray, 
Behold, ye pass away! 
The sign of Ruin standeth at the gate, 
There, where they strove with Fate- 
And the ill power beheld the brothers' fall, 
And triumphed over all!  (ANTIGONE, ISMENE, and the CHORUS all take
part in the following responsive dirge.)  Thou wert smitten, in smiting,

Thou didst slay, and wert slain- 
By the spear of each other 
Ye lie on the plain, 
And ruthless the deed that ye wrought was, and ruthless the death
of the twain! 

Take voice, O my sorrow! 
Flow tear upon tear- 
Lay the slain by the slayer, 
Made one on the bier! 
Our soul in distraction is lost, and we mourn o'er the prey of the
spear! 

Ah, woe for your ending, 
Unbrotherly wrought! 
And woe for the issue, 
The fray that ye fought, 
The doom of a mutual slaughter whereby to the grave ye are brought!

Ah, twofold the sorrow- 
The heard and the seen! 
And double the tide 
Of our tears and our teen, 
As we stand by our brothers in death and wail for the love that has
been! 

O grievous the fate 
That attends upon wrong! 
Stern ghost of our sire, 
Thy vengeance is long! 
Dark Fury of hell and of death, the hands of thy kingdom are. strong!

O dark were the sorrows 
That exile hath known! 
He slew, but returned not 
Alive to his own! 
He struck down a brother, but fell, in the moment of triumph hewn
down! 

O lineage accurst, 
O doom and despair! 
Alas, for their quarrel, 
The brothers that were! 
And woe! for their pitiful end, who once were our love and our care!

O grievous the fate 
That attends upon wrong) 
Stern ghost of our sire, 
Thy vengeance is long! 
Dark Fury of hell and of death, the hands of thy kingdom are strong!

By proof have ye learnt it! 
At once and as one, 
O brothers beloved, 
To death ye were, done! 
Ye came to the strife of the sword, and behold! ye are both overthrown!

O grievous the tale is, 
And grievous their fall, 
To the house, to the land, 
And to me above all! 
Ah, God! for the curse that hath come, the sin and the ruin withal!

O children distraught, 
Who in madness have died! 
Shall ye rest with old kings 
In the place of their pride? 
Alas for the wrath of your sire if he findeth you laid by his side!
(A HERALD enters.)  

HERALD I bear command to tell to one and all 
What hath approved itself and now is law, 
Ruled by the counsellors of Cadmus' town. 
For this Eteocles, it is resolved 
To lay him on his earth-bed, in this soil, 
Not without care and kindly sepulture. 
For why? he hated those who hated us, 
And, with all duties blanielessly performed 
Unto the sacred ritual of his sires, 
He met such end as gains our city's grace,- 
With auspices that do ennoble death. 
Such words I have in charge to speak of him: 
But of his brother Polyneices, this- 
Be he cast out unburied, for the dogs 
To rend and tear: for he presumed to waste 
The land of the Cadmeans, had not Heaven- 
Some god of those who aid our fatherland- 
Opposed his onset, by his brother's spear, 
To whom, tho' dead, shall consecration come! 
Against him stood this wretch, and brought a horde 
Of foreign foemen, to beset our town. 
He therefore shall receive his recompense, 
Buried ignobly in the maw of kites- 
No women-wailers to escort his corpse 
Nor pile his tomb nor shrill his dirge anew- 
Unhouselled, unattended, cast away 
So, for these brothers, doth our State ordain. 

ANTIGONE And I-to those who make such claims of rule 
In Cadmus' town-I, though no other help,  (Pointing to the body of
POLYNEICES)  I, I will bury this my brother's corse 
And risk your wrath and what may come of it! 
It shames me not to face the State, and set 
Will against power, rebellion resolute: 
Deep in my heart is set my sisterhood, 
My common birthright with my brothers, born 
All of one womb, her children who, for woe, 
Brought forth sad offspring to a sire ill-starred. 
Therefore, my soul! take thou thy willing share, 
In aid of him who now can will no more, 
Against this outrage: be a sister true, 
While yet thou livest, to a brother dead! 
Him never shall the wolves with ravening maw 
Rend and devour: I do forbid the thought! 
I for him, I-albeit a woman weak- 
In place of burial-pit, will give him rest 
By this protecting handful of light dust 
Which, in the lap of this poor linen robe, 
I bear to hallow and bestrew his corpse 
With the due covering. Let none gainsay! 
Courage and craft shall arm me, this to do. 

HERALD I charge thee, not to flout the city's law! 

ANTIGONE I charge thee, use no useless heralding! 

HERALD Stern is a people newly 'scaped from death. 

ANTIGONE Whet thou their sternness! burial he shall have.

HERALD How? grace of burial, to the city's foe? 

ANTIGONE God hath not judged him separate in guilt. 

HERALD True-till he put this land in jeopardy. 

ANTIGONE His rights usurped, he answered wrong with wrong.

HERALD Nay-but for one man's sin he smote the State. 

ANTIGONE Contention doth out-talk all other gods! 
Prate thou no more-I will to bury him. 

HERALD Will, an thou wilt! but I forbid the deed.  (The HERALD goes
out.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Exulting Fates, who waste the line 
And whelm the house of Oedipus! 
Fiends, who have slain, in wrath condign, 
The father and the children thus! 
What now befits it that I do, 
What meditate, what undergo? 
Can I the funeral rite refrain, 
Nor weep for Polyneices slain? 
But yet, with fear I shrink and thrill, 
Presageful of the city's will! 
Thou, O Eteocles, shalt have 
Full rites, and mourners at thy grave, 
But he, thy brother slain, shall he, 
With none to weep or cry Alas, 
To unbefriended burial pass? 
Only one sister o'er his bier, 
To raise the cry and pour the tear- 
Who can obey such stern decree? 

SEMI-CHORUS Let those who hold our city's sway 
Wreak, or forbear to wreak, their will 
On those who cry, Ah, well-a-day! 
Lamenting Polyneices still! 
We will go forth and, side by side 
With her, due burial will provide! 
Royal he was; to him be paid 
Our grief, wherever he be laid! 
The crowd may sway, and change, and still 
Take its caprice for justice' will 
But we this dead Eteocles, 
As Justice wills and Right decrees, 
Will bear unto his grave! 
For-under those enthroned on high 
And Zeus' eternal royalty- 
He unto us salvation gave! 
He saved us from a foreign yoke,- 
A wild assault of outland folk, 
A savage, alien wave! 

THEEND
 

----------------------------------------------------------------------

A sacred precinct near the shore in Argos. Several statues of the
gods can be seen, as well as a large altar. As the play opens, DANAUS,
and his fifty daughters, the maidens who compose the CHORUS, enter.
Their costumes have an oriental richness about them not characteristic
of the strictly Greek. They carry also the wands of suppliants. The
CHORUS is singing.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

CHORUS Zeus! Lord and guard of suppliant hands 
Look down benign on us who crave 
Thine aid-whom winds and waters drave 
From where, through drifting shifting sands, 
Pours Nilus to the wave. 
From where the green land, god-possest, 
Closes and fronts the Syrian waste, 
We flee as exiles, yet unbanned 
By murder's sentence from our land; 
But-since Aegyptus had decreed 
His sons should wed his brother's seed,- 
Ourselves we tore from bonds abhorred, 
From wedlock not of heart but hand, 
Nor brooked to call a kinsman lord! 

And Danaus, our sire and guide, 
The king of counsel, pond'ring well 
The dice of fortune as they fell, 
Out of two griefs the kindlier chose, 
And bade us fly, with him beside, 
Heedless what winds or waves arose, 
And o'er the wide sea waters haste, 
Until to Argos' shore at last 
Our wandering pinnace came- 
Argos, the immemorial home 
Of her from whom we boast to come- 
Io, the ox-horned maiden, whom, 
After long wandering, woe, and scathe, 
Zeus with a touch, a mystic breath, 
Made mother of our name. 
Therefore, of all the lands of earth, 
On this most gladly step we forth, 
And in our hands aloft we bear- 
Sole weapon for a suppliant's wear- 
The olive-shoot, with wool enwound! 
City, and land, and waters wan 
Of Inachus, and gods most high, 
And ye who, deep beneath the ground, 
Bring vengeance weird on mortal man, 
Powers of the grave, on you we cry! 
And unto Zeus the Saviour, guard 
Of mortals' holy purity! 
Receive ye us-keep watch and ward 
Above the suppliant maiden band! 
Chaste be the heart of this your land 
Towards the weak! but, ere the throng, 
The wanton swarm, from Egypt sprung, 
Leap forth upon the silted shore, 
Thrust back their swift-rowed bark again, 
Repel them, urge them to the main! 
And there, 'mid storm and lightning's shine, 
And scudding drift and thunder's roar, 
Deep death be theirs, in stormy brine! 
Before they foully grasp and win 
Us, maiden-children of their kin, 
And climb the couch by law denied, 
And wrong each weak reluctant bride. 

(strophe 1)

And now on her I call, 
Mine ancestress, who far on Egypt's shore 
A young cow's semblance wore,- 
A maiden once, by Hera's malice changed! 
And then on him withal, 
Who, as amid the flowers the grazing creature ranged, 
Was in her by a breath of Zeus conceived; 
And, as the hour of birth drew nigh, 
By fate fulfilled, unto the light he came;- 
And Epaphus for name, 
Born from the touch of Zeus, the child received 

(antistrophe 1)

On him, on him I cry, 
And him for patron hold- 
While in this grassy vale I stand, 
Where lo roamed of old! 
And here, recounting all her toil and pain, 
Signs will I show to those who rule the land 
That I am child of hers; and all shall understand, 
Hearing the doubtful tale of the dim past made plain. 

(strophe 2)

And, ere the end shall be, 
Each man the truth of what I tell shall see. 
And if there dwell hard by 
One skilled to read from bird-notes augury, 
That man, when through his ears shall thrill our tearful wail,

Shall deem he hears the voice, the plaintive tale 
Of her, the piteous spouse of Tereus, lord of guile- 
Whom the hawk harries yet, the mourning nightingale. 

(antistrophe 2)

She, from her happy home and fair streams scared away, 
Wails wild and sad for haunts beloved erewhile. 
Yea, and for Itylus-ah, well-a-day! 
Slain by her own, his mother's hand, 
Maddened by lustful wrong, the deed by Tereus planned! 

(strophe 3)

Like her I wail and wail, in soft lonian tones, 
And as she wastes, even so 
Wastes my soft cheek, once ripe with Nilus' suns, 
And all my heart dissolves in utter woe. 
Sad flowers of grief I cull, 
Fleeing from kinsmen's love unmerciful- 
Yea, from the clutching hands, the wanton crowd, 
I sped across the waves, from Egypt's land of cloud. 

(antistrophe 3)

Gods of the ancient cradle of my race, 
Hear me, just gods! With righteous grace 
On me, on me look down! 
Grant not to youth its heart's unchaste desire, 
But, swiftly spurning lust's unholy fire, 
Bless only love and willing wedlock's crown! 
The war-worn fliers from the battle's wrack 
Find refuge at the hallowed altar-side, 
The sanctuary divine,- 
Ye gods! such refuge unto me provide- 
Such sanctuary be mine! 

(strophe 4)

Though the deep will of Zeus be hard to track, 
Yet doth it flame and glance, 
A beacon in the dark, 'mid clouds of chance 
That wrap mankind. 

(antistrophe 4)

Yea, though the counsel fall, undone it shall not lie, 
Whate'er be shaped and fixed within Zeus' ruling mind- 
Dark as a solemn grove, with sombre leafage shaded, 
His paths of purpose wind, 
A marvel to man's eye. 

(strophe 5)

Smitten by him, from towering hopes degraded, 
Mortals lie low and still.- 
Tireless and effortless, works forth its will 
The arm divine! 
God from His holy seat, in calm of unarmed power, 
Brings forth the deed, at its appointed hour! 

(antistrophe 5)

Let Him look down on mortal wantonness! 
Lo! how the youthful stock of Belus' line 
Craves for me, uncontrolled- 
With greed and madness bold- 
Urged on by passion's shunless stress- 
And, cheated, learns too late the prey has 'scaped their hold!

(strophe 6)

Ah, listen, listen to my grievous tale, 
My sorrow's words, my shrill and tearful cries! 
Ah woe, ah woe! 
Loud with lament the accents rise, 
And from my living lips my own sad dirges flow! 

(refrain 1)

O Apian land of hill and dale, 
Thou kennest yet, O land, this faltered foreign wail- 
Have mercy, hear my prayer! 
Lo, how again, again, rend and tear 
My woven raiment, and from off my hair 
Cast the Sidonian veil! 

(antistrophe 6)

Ah, but if fortune smile, if death be driven away, 
Vowed rites, with eager haste, we to the gods will pay! 
Alas, alas again! 
O whither drift the waves? and who shall loose the pain?

(refrain 1)

O Apian land of hill and dale, 
Thou kennest yet, O land, this faltered foreign wail 
Have mercy, hear my prayer! 
Lo, how again, again, I rend and tear 
My woven raiment, and from off my hair 
Cast the Sidonian veil! 

(strophe 7)

The wafting oar, the bark with woven sail, 
From which the sea foamed back, 
Sped me, unharmed of storms, along the breeze's track- 
Be it unblamed of me! 
But ah, the end, the end of my emprise! 
May He, the Father, with all-seeing eyes, 
Grant me that end to see! 

(refrain 2)

Grant that henceforth unstained as heretofore 
I may escape the forced embrace 
Of those proud children of the race 
That sacred Io bore. 

(antistrophe 7)

And thou, O maiden-goddess chaste and pure- 
Queen of the inner fane- 
Look of thy grace on me, O Artemis, 
Thy willing suppliant-thine, thine it is;, 
Who from the lustful onslaught fled secure, 
To grant that I too without stain 
The shelter of thy purity may gain! 

(refrain 2)

Grant that henceforth unstained as heretofore 
I may escape the forced embrace 
Of those proud children of the race 
That sacred Io bore! 

(strophe 8)

Yet if this may not be, 
We, the dark race sun-smitten, we 
Will speed with suppliant wands 
To Zeus who rules below, with hospitable hands 
Who welcomes all the dead from all the lands: 
Yea, by our own hands strangled, we will go, 
Spurned by Olympian gods, unto the gods below! 

(refrain 3)

Zeus, hear and save! 
The searching, poisonous hate, that Io vexed and drave, 
Was of a goddess: well I know 
The bitter ire, the wrathful woe 
Of Hera, queen of heaven- 
A storm, a storm her breath, whereby we yet are driven! 

(antistrophe 8)

Bethink thee, what dispraise 
Of Zeus himself mankind will raise, 
If now he turn his face averted from our cries! 
If now, dishonoured and alone, 
The ox-horned maiden's race shall be undone, 
Children of Epaphus, his own begotten son- 
Zeus, listen from on high!-to thee our prayers arise. 

(refrain 3)

Zeus, hear and save! 
The searching poisonous hate, that lo vexed and drave, 
Was of a goddess: well I know 
The bitter ire, the wrathful woe 
Of Hera, queen of heaven- 
A storm, a storm her breath, whereby we yet are driven!  (After the
CHORUS has finished its song and dance, DANAUS comes forward.)

DANAUS Children, be wary-wary he with whom 
Ye come, your trusty sire and steersman old: 
And that same caution hold I here on land, 
And bid you hoard my words, inscribing them 
On memory's tablets. Lo, I see afar 
Dust, voiceless herald of a host, arise; 
And hark, within their griding sockets ring 
Axles of hurrying wheels! I see approach, 
Borne in curved cars, by speeding horses drawn, 
A speared and shielded band. The chiefs, perchance. 
Of this their land are hitherward intent 
To look on us, of whom they yet have heard 
By messengers alone. But come who may, 
And come he peaceful or in ravening wrath 
Spurred on his path, 'twere best, in any case, 
Damsels, to cling unto this altar-mound 
Made sacred to their gods of festival,- 
A shrine is stronger than a tower to save, 
A shield that none may cleave. Step swift thereto, 
And in your left hands hold with reverence 
The white-crowned wands of suppliance, the sign 
Beloved of Zeus, compassion's lord, and speak 
To those that question you, words meek and low 
And piteous, as beseems your stranger state, 
Clearly avowing of this flight of yours 
The bloodless cause; and on your utterance 
See to it well that modesty attend; 
From downcast eyes, from brows of pure control, 
Let chastity look forth; nor, when ye speak, 
Be voluble nor eager-they that dwell 
Within this land are sternly swift to chide. 
And be your words submissive: heed this well; 
For weak ye are, outcasts on stranger lands, 
And froward talk beseems not strengthless hands. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O father, warily to us aware 
Thy words are spoken, and thy wisdom's hest 
My mind shall hoard, with Zeus our sire to aid. 

DANAUS Even so-with gracious aspect let him aid. 

LEADER Fain were I now to seat me by thy side- 

DANAUS Now dally not, but put our thought in act. 

LEADER Zeus, pity our distress, or e'er we die. 

DANAUS If so he will, your toils to joy will turn. 

LEADER Lo, on this shrine, the semblance of a bird. 

DANAUS Zeus' bird of dawn it is; invoke the sign. 

LEADER Thus I invoke the saving rays of morn. 

DANAUS Next, bright Apollo, exiled once from heaven. 

LEADER The exiled god will pity our exile. 

DANAUS Yea, may he pity, giving grace and aid. 

LEADER Whom next invoke I, of these other gods? 

DANAUS Lo, here a trident, symbol of a god. 

LEADER Who gave sea-safety; may he bless on land! 

DANAUS This next is Hermes, carved in Grecian wise. 

LEADER Then let him herald help to freedom won. 

DANAUS Lastly, adore this altar consecrate 
To many lesser gods in one; then crouch 
On holy ground, a flock of doves that flee, 
Scared by no alien hawks, a kin not kind, 
Hateful, and fain of love more hateful still, 
Foul is the bird that rends another bird, 
And foul the men who hale unwilling maids, 
From sire unwilling, to the bridal bed. 
Never on earth, nor in the lower world, 
Shall lewdness such as theirs escape the ban: 
There too, if men say right, a God there is 
Who upon dead men turns their sin to doom, 
To final doom. Take heed, draw hitherward, 
That from this hap your safety ye may win.  (The KING OF ARGOS enters,
followed by his attendants and soldiers.)  

THE KING OF ARGOS Speak-of what land are ye? No Grecian band

Is this to whom I speak, with Eastern robes 
And wrappings richly dight: no Argive maid, 
No woman in all Greece such garb doth wear, 
This too gives marvel, how unto this land, 
Unheralded, unfriended, without guide, 
And without fear, ye came? yet wands I see, 
True sign of suppliance, by you laid down 
On shrines of these our gods of festival. 
No land but Greece can rede such signs aright. 
Much else there is, conjecture well might guess, 
But let words teach the man who stands to hear. 

LEADER True is the word thou spakest of my garb; 
But speak I unto thee as citizen, 
Or Hermes' wandbearer, or chieftain king? 

THE KING OF ARGOS For that, take heart and answer without fear.

I am Pelasgus, ruler of this land, 
Child of Palaichthon, whom the earth brought forth; 
And, rightly named from me, the race who reap 
This country's harvests are Pelasgian called. 
And o'er the wide and westward-stretching land, 
Through which the lucent wave of Strymon flows, 
I rule; Perrhaebia's land my boundary is 
Northward, and Pindus' further slopes, that watch 
Paeonia, and Dodona's mountain ridge. 
West, east, the limit of the washing seas 
Restrains my rule-the interspace is mine. 
But this whereon we stand is Apian land, 
Styled so of old from the great healer's name; 
For Apis, coming from Naupactus' shore 
Beyond the strait, child of Apollo's self 
And like him seer and healer, cleansed this land 
From man-devouring monsters, whoin the earth, 
Stained with pollution of old bloodshedding, 
Brought forth in malice, beasts of ravening jaws, 
A grisly throng of serpents manifold. 
And healings of their hurt, by knife and charm, 
Apis devised, unblamed of Argive men, 
And in their prayers found honour, for reward. 
-Lo, thou hast heard the tokens that I give: 
Speak now thy race, and tell a forthright tale; 
In sooth, this people loves not many words. 

LEADER Short is my word and clear. Of Argive race 
We come, from her, the ox-horned maiden who 
Erst bare the sacred child. My word shall give 
Whate'er can stablish this my soothfast tale. 

THE KING OF ARGOS O stranger maids, I may not trust this word,

That ye have share in this our Argive race. 
No likeness of our country do ye bear, 
But semblance as of Libyan womankind. 
Even such a stock by Nilus' banks might grow; 
Yea, and the Cyprian stamp, in female forms, 
Shows, to the life, what males impressed the same. 
And, furthermore, of roving Indian maids 
Whose camping-grounds by Aethiopia lie, 
And camels burdened even as mules, and bearing 
Riders, as horses bear, mine ears have heard; 
And tales of flesh-devouring mateless maids 
Called Amazons: to these, if bows ye bare, 
I most had deemed you like. Speak further yet, 
That of your Argive birth the truth I learn. 

LEADER Here in this Argive land-so runs the tale- 
Io was priestess once of Hera's fane. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Yea, truth it is, and far this word prevails:

Is't said that Zeus with mortal mingled love? 

LEADER Ay, and that Hera that embrace surmised. 

THE KING OF ARGOS How issued then this strife of those on high?

LEADER By Hera's will, a heifer she became. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Held Zeus aloof then from the horned beast?

LEADER 'Tis said, he loved, in semblance of a bull. 

THE KING OF ARGOS And his stern consort, did she aught thereon?

LEADER One myriad-eyed she set, the heifer's guard. 

THE KING OF ARGOS How namest thou this herdsman many-eyed?

LEADER Argus, the child of Earth, whom Hermes slew. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Still did the goddess vex the beast ill-starred?

LEADER She wrought a gadfly with a goading sting. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Thus drave she Io hence, to roam afar?

LEADER Yea-this thy word coheres exact with mine. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Then to Canopus and to Memphis came she?

LEADER And by Zeus' hand was touched, and bare a child.

THE KING of ARGOS 
Who vaunts him the Zeus-mated creature's son? 

LEADER Epaphus, named rightly from the saving touch. 

THE KING OF ARGOS And whom in turn did Epaphus beget? 

LEADER Libya, with name of a wide land endowed. 

THE KING OF ARGOS And who from her was born unto the race?

LEADER Belus: from him two sons, my father one. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Speak now to me his name, this greybeard wise.

LEADER Danaus; his brother fifty sons begat. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Grudge not, in telling, his name too to tell.

LEADER Aegyptus: thou my lineage old hast heard- 
Strive then to aid a kindred Argive band. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Yea of a truth, in backward scope of time,

Of Argive race ye seem: but say what chance 
Fell on you, goading you from home and land? 

LEADER Lord of Pelasgian men, calamity 
Is manifold and diverse; as of birds 
Feather from feather differs, so of men 
The woes are sundry. Who had dared foretell 
That this our sudden flight, this hate and fear 
Of loathly wedlock, would on Argos' shore 
Set forth a race of kindred lineage? 

THE KING OF ARGOS What crave ye of these gods of festival,

Holding up newly-plucked white-tufted boughs? 

LEADER Ne'er to be slaves unto Aegyptus' race. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Doth your own hate, or doth the law forbid?

LEADER Not as our lords, but as unloved, we chide them.

THE KING OF ARGOS 'Tis from such wedlock that advancement comes,

LEADER How easy is it, from the weak to turn! 

THE KING OF ARGOS How then toward you can I be conscience-clear?

LEADER Deny us, though Aegyptus' race demand. 

THE KING OF ARGOS A heavy task thou namest, a rash war.

LEADER But Justice champions them who strike for her. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Yea, if their side was from the outset hers.

LEADER Revere the gods thus crowned, who steer the State.

THE KING OF ARGOS Awe thrills me, seeing these shrines with leafage
crowned.  (The whole CHORUS now sings its responses to the KING.)

CHORUS (strophe 1)

Yea, stern the wrath of Zeus, the suppliants' lord. 
Child of Palaichthon, royal chief 
Of thy Pelasgians, hear! 
Bow down thine heart to my relief- 
A fugitive, a suppliant, swift with fear, 
A creature whom the wild wolves chase 
O'er toppling crags; in piteous case 
Aloud, afar she lows, 
Calling the herdsman's trusty arm to save her from her foes!

THE KING OF ARGOS Lo, with bowed heads beside our city shrines

Ye sit 'neath shade of new-plucked olive-boughs. 
Our distant kin's resentment Heaven forefend! 
Let not this hap, unhoped and unforeseen, 
Bring war on us: for strife we covet not. 

CHORUS (antistrophe 1)

Justice, the daughter of right-dealing Zeus, 
Justice, the queen of suppliants, look down, 
That this our plight no ill may loose 
Upon your town! 
This word, even from the young, let age and wisdom learn:

If thou to suppliants show grace, 
Thou shalt not lack Heaven's grace in turn, 
So long as virtue's gifts on heavenly shrines have place.

THE KING OF ARGOS Not at my private hearth ye sit and sue;

And if the city bear a common stain, 
Be it the common toil to cleanse the same: 
Therefore no pledge, no promise will I give, 
Ere counsel with the commonwealth be held. 

CHORUS (strophe 2)

Nay, but the source of sway, the city's self, art thou,

A power unjudged! thine, only thine, 
To rule the right of hearth and shrine! 
Before thy throne and sceptre all men bow! 
Thou, in all causes lord, beware the curse divine! 

THE KING OF ARGOS May that curse fall upon mine enemies!

I cannot aid you without risk of scathe, 
Nor scorn your prayers-unmerciful it were. 
Perplexed, distraught I stand, and fear alike 
The twofold chance, to do or not to do. 

CHORUS (antistrophe 2)

Have heed of him who looketh from on high, 
The guard of woeful mortals, whosoe'er 
Unto their fellows cry, 
And find no pity, find no justice there. 
Abiding in his wrath, the suppliants' lord 
Doth smite, unmoved by cries, unbent by prayerful word. 

THE KING OF ARGOS But if Aegyptus' children grasp you here,

Claiming, their country's right, to hold you theirs 
As next of kin, who dares to counter this? 
Plead ye your country's laws, if plead ye may, 
That upon you they lay no lawful hand. 

CHORUS (strophe 3)

Let me not fall, O nevermore, 
A prey into the young men's hand; 
Rather than wed whom I abhor, 
By pilot-stars I flee this land; 
O king, take justice to thy side, 
And with the righteous powers decide! 

THE KING OF ARGOS Hard is the cause-make me not judge thereof.

Already I have vowed it, to do nought 
Save after counsel with my people ta'en, 
King though I be; that ne'er in after time, 
If ill fate chance, my people then may say- 
In aid of strangers thou the State hast slain. 

CHORUS (antistrophe 3)

Zeus, lord of kinship, rules at will 
The swaying balance, and surveys 
Evil and good; to men of ill 
Gives evil, and to good men praise, 
And thou-since true those scales do sway- 
Shalt thou from justice shrink away? 

THE KING OF ARGOS A deep, a saving counsel here there needs-

An eye that like a diver to the depth 
Of dark perplexity can pass and see, 
Undizzied, unconfused. First must we care 
That to the State and to ourselves this thing 
Shall bring no ruin; next, that wrangling hands 
Shall grasp you not as prey, nor we ourselves 
Betray you thus embracing sacred shrines, 
Nor make the avenging all-destroying god, 
Who not in hell itself sets dead men free, 
A grievous inmate, an abiding bane. 
-Spake I not right, of saving counsel's need? 

CHORUS (strophe 4)

Yea, counsel take and stand to aid 
At justice' side and mine. 
Betray not me, the timorous maid 
Whom far beyond the brine 
A godless violence cast forth forlorn. 

(antistrophe 4)

O King, wilt thou behold- 
Lord of this land, wilt thou behold me torn 
From altars manifold? 
Bethink thee of the young men's wrath and lust, 
Hold off their evil pride; 

(strophe 5)

Steel not thyself to see the suppliant thrust 
From hallowed statues' side, 
Haled by the frontlet on my forehead bound, 
As steeds are led, and drawn 
By hands that drag from shrine and altar-mound 
My vesture's fringed lawn. 

(antistrophe 5)

Know thou that whether for Aegyptus' race 
Thou dost their wish fulfil, 
Or for the gods and for each holy place- 
Be thy choice good or ill, 
Blow is with blow requited, grace with grace. 
Such is Zeus' righteous will. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Yea, I have pondered: from the sea of doubt

Here drives at length the bark of thought ashore; 
Landward with screw and windlass haled, and firm, 
Clamped to her props, she lies. The need is stern; 
With men or gods a mighty strife we strive 
Perforce, and either hap in grief concludes. 
For, if a house be sacked, new wealth for old 
Not hard it is to win-if Zeus the lord 
Of treasure favour-more than quits the loss, 
Enough to pile the store of wealth full high; 
Or if a tongue shoot forth untimely speech, 
Bitter and strong to goad a man to wrath, 
Soft words there be to soothe that wrath away: 
But what device shall make the war of kin 
Bloodless? that woe, the blood of many beasts, 
And victims manifold to many gods, 
Alone can cure. Right glad I were to shun 
This strife, and am more fain of ignorance 
Than of the wisdom of a woe endured. 
The gods send better than my soul foretells! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Of many cries for mercy, hear the end.

THE KING OF ARGOS Say on, then, for it shall not 'scape mine ear.

LEADER Girdles we have, and bands that bind our robes. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Even so; such things beseem a woman's wear.

LEADER Know, then, with these a fair device there is- 

THE KING OF ARGOS Speak, then: what utterance doth this foretell?

LEADER Unless to us thou givest pledge secure 

THE KING OF ARGOS What can thy girdles' craft achieve for thee?

LEADER Strange votive tablets shall these statues deck.

THE KING OF ARGOS Mysterious thy resolve-avow it clear.

LEADER Swiftly to hang me on these sculptured gods! 

THE KING OF ARGOS Thy word is as a lash to urge my heart.

LEADER Thou seest truth, for I have cleared thine eyes.

THE KING OF ARGOS Yea, and woes manifold, invincible, 
A crowd of ills, sweep on me torrent-like. 
My bark goes forth upon a sea of troubles 
Unfathomed, ill to traverse, harbourless. 
For if my deed shall match not your demand, 
Dire, beyond shot of speech, shall be the bane 
Your death's pollution leaves unto this land. 
Yet if against your kin, Aegyptus' race, 
Before our gates I front the doom of war, 
Will not the city's loss be sore? Shall men 
For women's sake incarnadine the ground? 
But yet the wrath of Zeus, the suppliants' lord, 
I needs must fear: most awful unto man 
The terror of his anger. Thou, old man, 
The father of these maidens, gather up 
Within your arms these wands of suppliance, 
And lay them at the altars manifold 
Of all our country's gods, that all the town 
Know, by this sign, that ye come here to sue. 
Nor, in thy haste, do thou say aught of me. 
Swift is this folk to censure those who rule; 
But, if they see these signs of suppliance, 
It well may chance that each will pity you, 
And loathe the young men's violent pursuit; 
And thus a fairer favour you may find: 
For, to the helpless, each man's heart is kind. 

DANAUS To us, beyond gifts manifold it is 
To find a champion thus compassionate; 
Yet send with me attendants, of thy folk, 
Rightly to guide me, that I duly find 
Each altar of your city's gods that stands 
Before the fane, each dedicated shrine; 
And that in safety through the city's ways 
I may pass onwards: all unlike to yours 
The outward semblance that I wear-the race 
That Nilus rears is all dissimilar 
To that of Inachus. Keep watch and ward 
Lest heedlessness bring death: full oft, I ween, 
Friend hath slain friend, not knowing whom he slew. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Go at his side, attendants,-he saith well.

On to the city's consecrated shrines! 
Nor be of many words to those ye meet, 
The while this suppliant voyager ye lead.  (DANAUS departs with attendants.)

LEADER Let him go forward, thy command obeying. 
But me how biddest, how assurest thou? 

THE KING OF ARGOS Leave there the new-plucked boughs, thy sorrow's
sign. 

LEADER Thus beckoned forth, at thy behest I leave them.

THE KING OF ARGOS Now to this level precinct turn thyself.

LEADER Unconsecrate it is, and cannot shield me. 

THE KING OF ARGOS We will not yield thee to those falcons' greed.

LEADER What help? more fierce they are than serpents fell.

THE KING OF ARGOS We spake thee fair-speak thou them fair in turn.

LEADER What marvel that we loathe them, scared in soul?

THE KING OF ARGOS Awe towards a king should other fears transcend.

LEADER Thus speak, thus act, and reassure my mind. 

THE KING OF ARGOS Not long thy sire shall leave thee desolate.

But I will call the country's indwellers, 
And with soft words th' assembly will persuade, 
And warn your sire what pleadings will avail. 
Therefore abide ye, and with prayer entreat 
The country's gods to compass your desire; 
The while I go, this matter to provide, 
Persuasion and fair fortune at my side.  (The KING OF ARGOS departs
with his retinue. The CHORUS forms to sing its prayer to Zeus.)

CHORUS (strophe 1)

O King of Kings, among the blest 
Thou highest and thou happiest, 
Listen and grant our prayer, 
And, deeply loathing, thrust 
Away from us the young men's lust, 
And deeply drown 
In azure waters, down and ever down, 
Benches and rowers dark, 
The fatal and perfidious bark! 

(antistrophe 1)

Unto the maidens turn thy gracious care; 
Think yet again upon the tale of fame, 
How from the maiden loved of thee there sprung 
Mine ancient line, long since in many a legend sung! 
Remember, O remember, thou whose hand 
Did Io by a touch to human shape reclaim. 
For from this Argos erst our mother came 
Driven hence to Egypt's land, 
Yet sprung of Zeus we were, and hence our birth we claim.

(strophe 2)

And now have I roamed back 
Unto the ancient track 
Where Io roamed and pastured among flowers, 
Watched o'er by Argus' eyes, 
Through the lush grasses and the meadow bowers. 
Thence, by the gadfly maddened, forth she flies 
Unto far lands and alien peoples driven 
And, following fate, through paths of foam and surge, 
Sees, as she goes, the cleaving strait divide 
Greece, from the Eastland riven. 

(antistrophe 2)

And swift through Asian borders doth she urge 
Her course, o'er Phrygian mountains' sheep-clipt side; 
Thence, where the Mysian realm of Teuthras lies, 
Towards Lydian lowlands hies, 
And o'er Cilician and Pamphylian hills 
And ever-flowing rills, 
And thence to Aphrodite's fertile shore, 
The land of garnered wheat and wealthy store. 

(strophe 3)

And thence, deep-stung by wild unrest, 
By the winged fly that goaded her and drave, 
Unto the fertile land, the god-possest 
(Where, fed from far-off snows, 
Life-giving Nilus flows, 
Urged on by Typho's strength, a fertilizing wave), 
She roves, in harassed and dishonoured flight, 
Scathed by the blasting pangs of Hera's dread despite. 

(antistrophe 3)

And they within the land 
With terror shook and wanned, 
So strange the sight they saw, and were afraid- 
A wild twy-natured thing, half heifer and half maid. 

Whose hand was laid at last on Io, thus forlorn, 
With many roamings worn? 
Who bade the harassed maiden's peace return? 

(strophe 4)

Zeus, lord of time eterne. 
Yea, by his breath divine, by his unscathing strength, 
She lays aside her bane, 
And softened back to womanhood at length 
Sheds human tears again. 
Then, quickened with Zeus' veritable seed, 
A progeny she bare, 
A stainless babe, a child of heavenly breed. 

(antistrophe 4)

Of life and fortune fair. 
His is the life of life-so all men say,- 
His is the seed of Zeus. 
Who else had power stern Hera's craft to stay, 
Her vengeful curse to loose? 

Yea, all from Zeus befel! 
And rightly wouldst thou tell 
That we from Epaphus, his child, were born: 
Justly his deed was done; 

(strophe 5)

Unto what other one, 
Of all the gods, should I for justice turn? 
From him our race did spring; 
Creator he and King, 
Ancient of days and wisdom he, and might. 
As bark before the wind, 
So, wafted by his mind, 
Moves every counsel, each device aright. 

(antistrophe 5)

Beneath no stronger hand 
Holds he a weak command, 
No throne doth he abase him to adore; 
Swift as a word, his deed 
Acts out what stands decreed 
In counsels of his heart, for evermore.  (DANAUS re-enters.)

DANAUS Take heart, my children: the land's heart is kind,

And to full issue has their voting come. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS All hail, my sire; thy word brings utmost joy.

Say, to what issue is the vote made sure, 
And how prevailed the people's crowding hands? 

DANAUS With one assent the Argives spake their will, 
And, hearing, my old heart took youthful cheer. 
The very sky was thrilled when high in air 
The concourse raised right hands and swore their oath:- 
Free shall the maidens sojourn in this land. 
Unharried, undespoiled by mortal wight: 
No native hand, no hand of foreigner 
Shall drag them hence; if any man use force- 
Whoe'er of all our countrymen shall fail 
To come unto their aid, let him go forth, 
Beneath the people's curse, to banishment. 
So did the king of this Pelasgian folk 
Plead on behalf of us, and bade them heed 
That never, in the after-time, this realm 
Should feed to fulness the great enmity 
Of Zeus, the suppliants' guard, against itself! 
A twofold curse, for wronging stranger-guests 
Who are akin withal, confrontingly 
Should rise before this city and be shown 
A ruthless monster, fed on human doom. 
Such things the Argive people heard, and straight, 
Without proclaim of herald, gave assent: 
Yea, in full conclave, the Pelasgian folk 
Heard suasive pleas, and Zeus through them resolved.  (The CHORUS
now sings a prayer of thankfulness.)  

CHORUS Arouse we now to chant our prayer 
For fair return of service fair 
And Argos' kindly will. 
Zeus, lord of guestright, look upon 
The grace our stranger lips have won. 
In right and truth, as they begun, 
Guide them, with favouring hand, until 
Thou dost their blameless wish fulfil! 

(strophe 1)

Now may the Zeus-born gods on high 
Hear us pour forth 
A votive prayer for Argos' clan!- 
Never may this Pelasgian earth, 
Amid the fire-wrack, shrill the dismal cry 
On Ares, ravening lord of fight, 
Who in an alien harvest mows down man! 
For lo, this land had pity on our plight, 
And unto us were merciful and leal, 
To us, the piteous flock, who at Zeus' altar kneel! 

(antistrophe 1)

They scorned not the pleas of maidenhood, 
Nor with the young men's will hath their will stood. 
They knew right well 
Th' unearthly watching fiend invincible, 
The foul avenger-let him not draw near! 
For he, on roofs ill-starred, 
Defiling and polluting, keeps a ghastly ward! 
They knew his vengeance, and took holy heed 
To us, the sister suppliants, who cry 
To Zeus, the lord of purity: 
Therefore with altars pure they shall the gods revere. 
Thus, through the boughs that shade our lips, fly forth in air,

(strophe 2)

Fly forth, O eager prayer! 
May never pestilence efface 
This city's race, 
Nor be the land with corpses strewed, 
Nor stained with civic blood! 
The stem of youth, unpluckt, to manhood come, 
Nor Ares rise from Aphrodite's bower, 
The lord of death and bane, to waste our youthful flower.

(antistrophe 2)

Long may the old 
Crowd to the altars kindled to consume 
Gifts rich and manifold- 
Offered to win from powers divine 
A benison on city and on shrine: 
Let all the sacred might adore 
Of Zeus most high, the lord 
Of guestright and the hospitable board, 
Whose immemorial law doth rule Fate's scales aright: 
The garners of earth's store 
Be full for evermore, 
And grace of Artemis make women's travail light; 

(strophe 3)

No devastating curse of fell disease 
This city seize; 
No clamour of the State arouse to war 
Ares, from whom afar 
Shrinketh the lute, by whom the dances fail- 
Ares, the lord of wail. 
Swarm far aloof from Argos' citizens 
All plague and pestilence, 
And may the Archer-God our children spare! 

(antistrophe 3)

May Zeus with foison and with fruitfulness 
The land's each season bless, 
And, quickened with Heaven's bounty manifold, 
Teem grazing flock and fold. 
Beside the altars of Heaven's hallowing 
Loud let the minstrels sing, 
And from pure lips float forth the harp-led strain in air!

(strophe 4)

And let the people's voice, the power 
That sways the State, in danger's hour 
Be wary, wise for all; 
Nor honour in dishonour hold, 
But-ere the voice of war be bold- 
Let them to stranger peoples grant 
Fair and unbloody covenant- 
Justice and peace withal; 

(antistrophe 4)

And to the Argive powers divine 
The sacrifice of laurelled kine, 
By rite ancestral, pay. 
Among three words of power and awe, 
Stands this, the third, the mighty law- 
Your gods, your fathers deified, 
Ye shall adore. Let this abide 
For ever and for aye. 

DANAUS Dear children, well and wisely have ye prayed; 
I bid you now not shudder, though ye hear 
New and alarming tidings from your sire. 
From this high place beside the suppliants' shrine 
The bark of our pursuers I behold, 
By divers tokens recognized too well. 
Lo, the spread canvas and the hides that screen 
The gunwale; lo, the prow, with painted eyes 
That seem her onward pathway to descry, 
Heeding too well the rudder at the stern 
That rules her, coming for no friendly end. 
And look, the seamen-all too plain their race- 
Their dark limbs gleam from out their snow-white garb; 
Plain too the other barks, a fleet that comes 
All swift to aid the purpose of the first, 
That now, with furled sail and with pulse of oars 
Which smite the wave together, comes aland. 
But ye, be calm, and, schooled not scared by fear, 
Confront this chance, be mindful of your trust 
In these protecting gods. And I will hence, 
And champions who shall plead your cause aright 
Will bring unto your side. There come perchance 
Heralds or envoys, eager to lay hand 
And drag you captive hence; yet fear them not; 
Foiled shall they be. Yet well it were for you 
(If, ere with aid I come, I tarry long) 
Not by one step this sanctuary to leave. 
Farewell, fear nought: soon shall the hour be born 
When he that scorns the gods shall rue his scorn. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Ah, but I shudder, father!-ah, even now,

Even as I speak, the swift-winged ships draw nigh! 

(strophe 1)

I shudder, I shiver, I perish with fear: 
Overseas though I fled, 
Yet nought it avails; my pursuers are near! 

DANAUS Children, take heart; they who decreed to aid 
Thy cause will arm for battle, well I ween. 

CHORUS But desperate is Aegyptus' ravening race, 
With fight unsated; thou too know'st it well. 

(antistrophe 1)

In their wrath they o'ertake us; the prow is deep-dark 
In the which they have sped, 
And dark is the bench and the crew of the bark! 

DANAUS Yea but a crew as stout they here shall find, 
And arms well steeled beneath a noon-day sun. 

CHORUS Ah yet, O father, leave us not forlorn! 
Alone, a maid is nought, a strengthless arm. 

(strophe 2)

With guile they pursue me, with counsel malign, 
And unholy their soul; 
And as ravens they seize me, unheeding the shrine! 

DANAUS Fair will befall us, children, in this chance, 
If thus in wrath they wrong the gods and you. 

CHORUS Alas, nor tridents nor the sanctity 
Of shrines will drive them, O my sire, from us! 

(antistrophe 2)

Unholy and daring and cursed is their ire, 
Nor own they control 
Of the gods, but like jackals they glut their desire! 

DANAUS Ay, but Come wolf, flee jackal, saith the saw; 
Nor can the flax-plant overbear the corn. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Lustful, accursed, monstrous is their will

As of beasts ravening-'ware we of their power 

DANAUS Look you, not swiftly puts a fleet to sea, 
Nor swiftly to its moorings; long it is 
Or e'er the saving cables to the shore 
Are borne, and long or e'er the steersmen cry, 
The good ship swings at anchor-all is well. 
Longest of all, the task to come aland 
Where haven there is none, when sunset fades 
In night. To pilot wise, the adage saith, 
Night is a day of wakefulness and pain. 
Therefore no force of weaponed men, as yet, 
Scatheless can come ashore, before the bark 
Lie at her anchorage securely moored. 
Bethink thee therefore, nor in panic leave 
The shrine of gods whose succour thou hast won. 
I go for aid-men shall not blame me long, 
Old, but with youth at heart and on my tongue.  (DANAUS departs as
the CHORUS sings in terror.)  

CHORUS (strophe 1)

O land of hill and dale, O holy land, 
What shall befall us? whither shall we flee, 
From Apian land to some dark lair of earth? 

O would that in vapour of smoke I might rise to the clouds of the
sky, 
That as dust which flits up without wings I might pass and evanish
and die! 

(antistrophe 1)

I dare not, I dare not abide: my heart yearns, eager to fly;

And dark is the cast of my thought; I shudder and tremble for fear.

My father looked forth and beheld: I die of the sight that draws near.

And for me be the strangling cord, the halter made ready by Fate,

Before to my body draws nigh the man of my horror and hate.

Nay, ere I will own him as lord, as handmaid to Hades I go!

(strophe 2)

And oh, that aloft in the sky, where the dark clouds are frozen to
snow, 
A refuge for me might be found, or a mountain-top smooth and too high

For the foot of the goat, where the vulture sits lonely, and none
may descry 
The pinnacle veiled in the cloud, the highest and sheerest of all,

Ere to wedlock that rendeth my heart, and love that is loveless,

I fall! 

(antistrophe 2)

Yea, a prey to the dogs and the birds of the mount will I give me
to be,- 
From wailing and curse and pollution it is death, only death, sets
me free: 
Let death come upon me before to the ravisher's bed I am thrust;

What champion, what saviour but death can I find, or what refuge from
lust? 

(strophe 3)

I will utter my shriek of entreaty, a prayer that shrills up to the
sky, 
That calleth the gods to compassion, a tuneful, a pitiful cry,

That is loud to invoke the releaser. O father, look down on the fight;

Look down in thy wrath on the wronger, with eyes that are eager for
right. 
Zeus, thou that art lord of the world, whose kingdom is strong over
all, 
Have mercy on us! At thine altar for refuge and safety we call.

(antistrophe 3)

For the race of Aegyptus is fierce, with greed and with malice afire;

They cry as the questing hounds, they sweep with the speed of desire.

But thine is the balance of fate, thou rulest the wavering scale,

And without thee no mortal emprise shall have strength to achieve
or prevail.  (The CHORUS rushes to the altar during the final part
of the song.)  Alack, alack! the ravisher- 
He leaps from boat to beach, he draweth near! 
Away, thou plunderer accurst! 
Death seize thee first, 
Or e'er thou touch me-off! God, hear our cry, 
Our maiden agony! 
Ah, ah, the touch, the prelude of my shame. 
Alas, my maiden fame! 
O sister, sister, sister, to the altar cling, 
For he that seizeth me, 
Grim is his wrath and stern, by land as on the sea. 
Guard us, O king!  (The HERALD OF AEGYPTUS enters with attendants.
The lines in the following scene between the HERALD and the CHORUS
are sung and are accompanied by a frenzied symbolic dance.)

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Hence to my barge-step swiftly, tarry not.

CHORUS Alack, he rends-he rends my hair! O wound on wound!

Help! my lopped head will fall, my blood gush o'er the ground!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Aboard, ye cursed-with a new curse, go!

CHORUS Would God that on the wand'ring brine 
Thou and this braggart tongue of thine 
Had sunk beneath the main- 
Thy mast and planks, made fast in vain! 
Thee would I drive aboard once more, 
A slayer and a dastard, from the shore! 

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Be still, thou vain demented soul; 
My force thy craving shall control. 
Away, aboard! What, clingest to the shrine? 
Away! this city's gods I hold not for divine. 

CHORUS Aid me, ye gods, that never, never 
I may again behold 
The mighty, the life-giving river, 
Nilus, the quickener of field and fold! 
Alack, O sire, unto the shrine I cling- 
Shrine of this land from which mine ancient line did spring!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Shrines, shrines, forsooth!-the ship, the ship
be shrine 
Aboard, perforce and will-ye nill-ye, go! 
Or e'er from hands of mine 
Ye suffer torments worse and blow on blow. 

CHORUS Alack, God grant those hands may strive in vain 
With the salt-streaming wave, 
When 'gainst the wide-blown blasts thy bark shall strain

To round Sarpedon's cape, the sandbank's treach'rous grave.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Shrill ye and shriek unto what gods ye may,

Ye shall not leap from out Aegyptus' bark, 
How bitterly soe'er ye wail your woe. 

CHORUS Alack, alack my wrong! 
Stern is thy voice, thy vaunting loud and strong. 
Thy sire, the mighty Nilus, drive thee hence, 
Turning to death and doom thy greedy violence! 

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Swift to the vessel of the double prow,

Go quickly! let none linger, else this hand 
Ruthless will hale you by your tresses hence. 

CHORUS Alack, O father! from the shrine 
Not aid but agony is mine. 
As a spider he creeps and he clutches his prey, 
And he hales me away. 
A spectre of darkness, of darkness. Alas and alas! well-a-day!

O Earth, O my mother! O Zeus, thou king of the earth, and her child!

Turn back, we pray thee, from us his clamour and threatenings wild!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Peace! I fear not this country's deities.

They fostered not my childhood nor mine age. 

CHORUS Like a snake that is human he comes, he shudders and crawls
to my side: 
As an adder that biteth the foot, his clutch on my flesh doth abide.

O Earth, O my mother! O Zeus, thou king of the earth, and her child!

Turn back, we pray thee, from us his clamour and threatenings wild!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Swift each unto the ship; repine no more,

Or my hand shall not spare to rend your robe. 

CHORUS O chiefs, O leaders, aid me, or I yield! 

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Peace! if ye have not ears to hear my words,

Lo, by these tresses must I hale you hence. 

CHORUS Undone we are, O king! all hope is gone. 

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Ay, kings enow ye shall behold anon,

Aegyptus' sons-Ye shall not want for kings.  (The KING OF ARGOS enters
with his retinue.)  

THE KING OF ARGOS Sirrah, what dost thou? in what arrogance

Darest thou thus insult Pelasgia's realm? 
Deemest thou this a woman-hearted town? 
Thou art too full of thy barbarian scorn 
For us of Grecian blood, and, erring thus, 
Thou dost bewray thyself a fool in all! 

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Say thou wherein my deeds transgress my right.

THE KING OF ARGOS First, that thou play'st a stranger's part amiss.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Wherein? I do but search and claim mine own.

THE KING OF ARGOS To whom of our guest-champions hast appealed?

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS To Hermes, herald's champion, lord of search.

THE KING OF ARGOS Yea, to a god-yet dost thou wrong the gods!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS The gods that rule by Nilus I revere.

THE KING OF ARGOS Hear I aright? our Argive gods are nought?

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS The prey is mine, unless force rend it from me.

THE KING OF ARGOS At thine own peril touch them-'ware, and soon!

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS I hear thy speech, no hospitable word.

THE KING OF ARGOS I am no host for sacrilegious hands. 

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS I will go tell this to Aegyptus' sons.

THE KING OF ARGOS Well it I my pride will ponder not thy word.

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Yet, that I have my message clear to say

(For it behoves that heralds' words be clear, 
Be they or ill or good), how art thou named? 
By whom despoiled of this sister-band 
Of maidens pass I homeward?-speak and say! 
For lo, henceforth in Ares' court we stand, 
Who judges not by witness but by war: 
No pledge of silver now can bring the cause 
To issue: ere this thing end, there must be 
Corpse piled on corpse and many lives gasped forth. 

THE KING OF ARGOS What skills it that I tell my name to thee?

Thou and thy mates shall learn it ere the end. 
Know that if words unstained by violence 
Can change these maidens' choice, then mayest thou, 
With full consent of theirs, conduct them hence. 
But thus the city with one voice ordained- 
No force shall bear away the maiden band. 
Firmly this word upon the temple wall 
Is by a rivet clenched, and shall abide: 
Not upon wax inscribed and delible, 
Nor upon parchment sealed and stored away.- 
Lo, thou hast heard our free mouths speak their will: 
Out from our presence-tarry not, but go! 

HERALD OF AEGYPTUS Methinks we stand on some new edge of war:

Be strength and triumph on the young men's side! 

THE KING OF ARGOS Nay but here also shall ye find young men,

Unsodden with the juices oozed from grain.  (The HERALD OF AEGYPTUS
and his followers withdraw.)  But ye, O maids, with vour attendants
true, 
Pass hence with trust into the fenced town, 
Ringed with a wide confine of guarding towers. 
Therein are many dwellings for such guests 
As the State honours; there myself am housed 
Within a palace neither scant nor strait. 
There dwell ye, if ye will to lodge at ease 
In halls well-thronged: yet, if your soul prefer, 
Tarry secluded in a separate home. 
Choose ye and cull, from these our proffered gifts, 
Whiche'er is best and sweetest to your will: 
And I and all these citizens whose vote 
Stands thus decreed, will your protectors be. 
Look not to find elsewhere more loyal guard. 

CHORUS  (singing) O godlike chief, God grant my prayer:

Fair blessings on thy proffers fair, 
Lord of Pelasgia's race! 
Yet, of thy grace, unto our side 
Send thou the man of courage tried, 
Of counsel deep and prudent thought 
Be Danaus to his children brought; 
For his it is to guide us well 
And warn where it behoves to dwell- 
What place shall guard and shelter us 
From malice and tongues slanderous: 
Swift always are the lips of blame 
A stranger-maiden to defame- 
But Fortune give us grace! 

THE KING OF ARGOS A stainless fame, a welcome kind 
From all this people shall ye find: 
Dwell therefore, damsels, loved of us, 
Within our walls, as Danaus 
Allots to each, in order due, 
Her dower of attendants true.  (DANAUS re-enters. A troop of soldiers
accompanies him.)  

DANAUS High thanks, my children, unto Argos con, 
And to this folk, as to Olympian gods, 
Give offerings meet of sacrifice and wine; 
For saviours are they in good sooth to you. 
From me they heard, and bitter was their wrath, 
How those your kinsmen strove to work you wrong, 
And how of us were thwarted: then to me 
This company of spearmen did they grant, 
That honoured I might walk, nor unaware 
Die by some secret thrust and on this land 
Bring down the curse of death, that dieth not. 
Such boons they gave me: it behoves me pay 
A deeper reverence from a soul sincere. 
Ye, to the many words of wariness 
Spoken by me your father, add this word, 
That, tried by time, our unknown company 
Be held for honest: over-swift are tongues 
To slander strangers, over-light is speech 
To bring pollution on a stranger's name. 
Therefore I rede you, bring no shame on me 
Now when man's eye beholds your maiden prime. 
Lovely is beauty's ripening harvest-field, 
But ill to guard; and men and beasts, I wot, 
And birds and creeping things make prey of it. 
And when the fruit is ripe for love, the voice 
Of Aphrodite bruiteth it abroad, 
The while she guards the yet unripened growth. 
On the fair richness of a maiden's bloom 
Each passer looks, o'ercome with strong desire, 
With eyes that waft the wistful dart of love. 
Then be not such our hap, whose livelong toil 
Did make our pinnace plough the mighty main: 
Nor bring we shame upon ourselves, and joy 
Unto my foes. Behold, a twofold home- 
One of the king's and one the people's gift- 
Unbought, 'tis yours to hold,-a gracious boon. 
Go-but remember ye your sire's behest, 
And hold your life less dear than chastity. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS The gods above grant that all else be well.

But fear not thou, O sire, lest aught befal 
Of ill unto our ripened maidenhood. 
So long as Heaven have no new ill devised, 
From its chaste path my spirit shall not swerve.  (The members of
the CHORUS divide into two groups, to sing the final choral lyric
responsively.)  

SEMI-CHORUS (strophe 1)

Pass and adore ye the Blessed, the gods of the city who dwell

Around Erasinus, the gush of the swift immemorial tide. 

SEMI-CHORUS Chant ye, O maidens; aloud let the praise of Pelasgia
swell; 
Hymn we no longer the shores where Nilus to ocean doth glide.

SEMI-CHORUS (antistrophe 1)

Sing we the bounteous streams that ripple and gush through the city;

Quickening flow they and fertile, the soft new life of the plain.

SEMI-CHORUS Artemis, maiden most pure, look on us with grace and
with pity- 
Save us from forced embraces: such love hath no crown but a pain.

SEMI-CHORUS (strophe 2)

Yet not in scorn we chant, but in honour of Aphrodite; 
She truly and Hera alone have power with Zeus and control.

Holy the deeds of her rite, her craft is secret and mighty,

And high is her honour on earth, and subtle her sway of the soul.

SEMI-CHORUS Yea, and her child is Desire: in the train of his mother
he goeth- 
Yea and Persuasion soft-lipped, whom none can deny or repel:

Cometh Harmonia too, on whom Aphrodite bestoweth 
The whispering parley, the paths of the rapture that lovers love well.

SEMI-CHORUS (antistrophe 2)

Ah, but I tremble and quake lest again they should sail to reclaim!

Alas for the sorrow to come, the blood and the carnage of war.

Ah, by whose will was it done that o'er the wide ocean they came,

Guided by favouring winds, and wafted by sail and by oar?

SEMI-CHORUS Peace! for what Fate hath ordained will surely not tarry
but come; 
Wide is the counsel of Zeus, by no man escaped or withstood:

Only I pray that whate'er, in the end, of this wedlock he doom,

We, as many a maiden of old, may win from the ill to the good.

SEMI-CHORUS (strophe 3)

Great Zeus, this wedlock turn from me- 
Me from the kinsman bridegroom guard! 

SEMI-CHORUS Come what come may, 'tis Fate's decree. 

SEMI-CHORUS Soft is thy word-the doom is hard. 

SEMI-CHORUS Thou know'st not what the Fates provide. 

SEMI-CHORUS (antistrophe 3)

How should I scan Zeus' mighty will, 
The depth of counsel undescried? 

SEMI-CHORUS Pray thou no word of omen ill. 

SEMI-CHORUS What timely warning wouldst thou teach? 

SEMI-CHORUS Beware, nor slight the gods in speech. 

SEMI-CHORUS (strophe 4)

Zeus, hold from my body the wedlock detested, the bridegroom abhorred!

It was thou, it was thou didst release 
Mine ancestress Io from sorrow: thine healing it was that restored,

The touch of thine hand gave her peace. 

SEMI-CHORUS (antistrophe 4)

Be thy will for the cause of the maidens! of two ills, the lesser

I pray- 
The exile that leaveth me pure. 
May thy justice have heed to my cause, my prayers to thy mercy find
way! 
For the hands of thy saving are sure.
