----------------------------------------------------------------------

At Pherae, outside the Palace of ADMETUS, King of Thessaly. The centre
of the scene represents a portico with columns and a large double-door.
To the left are the women's quarters, to the right the guest rooms.
The centre doors of the Palace slowly open inwards, and Apollo comes
out. In his left hand he carries a large unstrung golden bow. He moves
slowly and majestically, turns, and raises his right hand in salutation
to the Palace.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

APOLLO Dwelling of Admetus, wherein I, a God, deigned to accept
the food of serfs! 

The cause was Zeus. He struck Asclepius, my son, full in the breast
with a bolt of thunder, and laid him dead. Then in wild rage I slew
the Cyclopes who forge the fire of Zeus. To atone for this my Father
forced me to labour as a hireling for a mortal man; and I came to
this country, and tended oxen for my host. To this hour I have protected
him and his. I, who am just, chanced on the son of Pheres, a just
man, whom I have saved from Death by tricking the Fates. The Goddesses
pledged me their faith Admetus should escape immediate death if, in
exchange, another corpse were given to the Under-Gods. 

One by one he tested all his friends, and even his father and the
old mother who bad brought him forth-and found none that would die
for him and never more behold the light of day, save only his wife.
Now, her spirit waiting to break loose, she droops upon his arm within
the house; this is the day when she must die and render up her life.

But I must leave this Palace's dear roof, for fear pollution soil
me in the house. 

See! Death, Lord of All the Dead, now comes to lead her to the house
of Hades! Most punctually he comes! How well he marked the day she
had to die!  (From the right comes DEATH, with a drawn sword in his
hand. He moves stealthily towards the Palace; then sees APOLLO and
halts abruptly. The two Deities confront each other.)  

DEATH Ha! Phoebus! You! Before this Palace! Lawlessly would you grasp,
abolish the rights of the Lower Gods! Did you not beguile the Fates
and snatch Admetus from the grave? Does not that suffice? Now, once
again, you have armed your hand with the bow, to guard the daughter
of Pelias who must die in her husband's stead! 

APOLLO Fear not! I hold for right, and proffer you just words.

DEATH If you hold for right, why then your bow? 

APOLLO My custom is ever to carry it. 

DEATH Yes! And you use it unjustly to aid this house! 

APOLLO I grieve for a friend's woe. 

DEATH So you would rob me of a second body? 

APOLLO Not by force I won the other. 

DEATH Why, then, is he in the world and not below the ground?

APOLLO In his stead he gives his wife-whom you have come to take.

DEATH And shall take-to the Underworld below the earth!

APOLLO Take her, and go! I know not if I can persuade you...

DEATH Not to kill her I must kill? I am appointed to that task.

APOLLO No, no! But to delay death for those about to die.

DEATH I hear your words and guess your wish! 

APOLLO May not Alcestis live to old age? 

DEATH No! I also prize my rights! 

APOLLO Yet at most you win one life. 

DEATH They who die young yield me a greater prize. 

APOLLO If she dies old, the burial will be richer. 

DEATH Phoebus, that argument favours the rich. 

APOLLO What! Are you witty unawares? 

DEATH The rich would gladly pay to die old. 

APOLLO So you will not grant me this favour? 

DEATH Not I! You know my nature. 

APOLLO Yes! Hateful to men and a horror to the gods! 

DEATH You cannot always have more than your due. 

APOLLO Yet you shall change, most cruel though you are! For a man
comes to the dwelling of Pheres, sent by Eurystheus to fetch a horse-drawn
chariot from the harsh-wintered lands of Thrace; and he shall be a
guest in the house of Admetus, and by force shall he tear this woman
from you. Thus shall you gain no thanks from us, and yet you shall
do this thing-and my hatred be upon you  (APOLLO goes out. DEATH gazes
after him derisively.)  

DEATH Talk all you will, you get no more of me! The woman shall go
down to the dwelling of Hades. Now must I go to consecrate her for
the sacrifice with this sword; for when once this blade has shorn
the victim's hair, then he is sacred to the Lower Gods!  (DEATH enters
the Palace by the open main door. The CHORUS enters from the right.
They are the Elders or Notables of the city, and, therefore move slowly,
leaning upon their staffs.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS  (chanting) Why is there no sound outside the
Palace? Why is the dwelling of Admetus silent? Not a friend here to
tell me if I must weep for a dead Queen or whether she lives and looks
upon the light, Alcestis, the daughter of Pelias, whom among all women
I hold the best wife to her spouse! 

CHORUS  (Singing) Is a sob to be heard? 
Or the beating of hands 
In the house? 
The lament for her end? 
Not one, 
Not one of her servants 
Stands at the gate! 

Ah! to roll back the wave of our woe, 
O Healer, 
Appear! 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Were she dead 
They had not been silent. 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS She is but a dead body! 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Yet she has not departed the house. 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Ah! Let me not boast! 
Why do you cling to hope? 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Would Admetus bury her solitary, 
Make a grave alone for a wife so dear? 

CHORUS At the gate I see not 
The lustral water from the spring 
Which stands at the gates of the dead! 
No shorn tress in the portal 
Laid in lament for the dead! 
The young women beat not their hands! 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Yet to-day is the day appointed.... 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Ah! What have you said? 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS When she must descend under earth 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS You have pierced my soul! 
You have pierced my mind! 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS He that for long 
Has been held in esteem 
Must weep when the good are destroyed. 

CHORUS No! 
There is no place on earth 
To send forth a suppliant ship- 
Not to Lycia, 
Not to Ammon's waterless shrine- 
To save her from death! 
The dreadful doom is at hand. 
To what laden altar of what God 
Shall I turn my steps? 

He alone- 
If the light yet shone for his eye- 
Asclepius, Phoebus's son, 
Could have led her back 
From the land of shadows, 
From the gates of Hades, 
For he raised the dead 
Ere the Zeus-driven shaft 
Slew him with thunder fire.... 
But now 
What hope can I hold for her life? 

LEADER  (chanting) The King has fulfilled 
Every rite; 
The altars of all the Gods 
Drip with the blood of slain beasts: 
Nothing, nothing avails.  (From the women's quarters in the left wing
of the Palace comes a woman in tears. She is not a slave, but one
of the personal attendants on the Queen.)  But now from the house
comes one of her women servants, all in tears. What now shall I learn?
(To the weeping Servant)  It is well to weep when our lords are in
sorrow-but tell us, we would know, is she alive, is she dead?

SERVANT You may say she is both alive and dead. 

LEADER How can the same man be dead and yet behold the light?

SERVANT She gasps, she is on the verge of death. 

LEADER Ah, unhappy man! For such a husband what loss is such a wife!

SERVANT The King will not know his loss until he suffers it.

LEADER Then there is no hope that her life may be saved?

SERVANT The fated day constrains her. 

LEADER Are all things befitting prepared for her? 

SERVANT The robes in which her lord will bury her are ready.

LEADER Then let her know that she dies gloriously, the best of women
beneath the sun by far! 

SERVANT How should she not be the best! Who shall deny it? What should
the best among women be? How better might a woman hold faith to her
lord than gladly to die for him? This the whole city knows, but you
will marvel when you hear what she has done within the house. When
she knew that the last of her days was come she bathed her white body
in river water, she took garments and gems from her rooms of cedar
wood, and clad herself nobly; then, standing before the hearth-shrine,
she uttered this prayer: 

'O Goddess, since now I must descend beneath the earth, for the last
time I make supplication to you: and entreat you to protect my motherless
children. Wed my son to a fair bride, and my daughter to a noble husband.
Let not my children die untimely, as I their mother am destroyed,
but grant that they live out happy lives with good fortune in their
own land!' 

To every altar in Admetus's house she went, hung them with garlands.
offered prayer, cut myrtle boughs-unweeping, unlamenting; nor did
the coming doom change the bright colour of her face. 

Then to her marriage-room she went, flung herself down upon her bed,
and wept, and said: 

'O my marriage-bed, wherein I loosed my virgin girdle to him for whom
I die! Farewell! I have no hatred for you. Only me you lose. Because
I held my faith to you and to my lord-I must die. Another woman shall
possess you, not more chaste indeed than I, more fortunate perhaps.'

She fell upon her knees and kissed it, and all the bed was damp with
the, tide of tears which flooded to her eyes. And when she was fulfilled
of many tears, drooping she rose from her bed and made as if to go,
and many times she turned to go and many times turned back, and flung
herself once more upon the bed. 

Her children clung to their mother's dress, and wept; and she clasped
them in her arms and kissed them turn by turn, as a dying woman.

All the servants in the house wept with compassion for their Queen,
But she held out her hand to each, and there was none so base to whom
she did not speak, and who did not reply again. 

Such is the misery in Admetus's house. If he had died, he would be
nothing now; and, having escaped, he suffers an agony he will never
forget. 

LEADER And does Admetus lament this woe-since he must be robbed of
so noble a woman? 

SERVANT He weeps, and clasps in his arms his dear bedfellow, and
cries to her not to abandon him, asking impossible things. For she
pines, and is wasted by sickness. She falls away, a frail burden on
his arm; and yet, though faintly, she still breathes, still strives
to look upon the sunlight, which she shall never see hereafter-since
now for the last time she looks upon the orb and splendour of the
sun I 

I go, and shall announce that you are here; for all men are not so
well-minded to their lords as loyally to stand near them in misfortunes,
but you for long have been a friend to both my lords.  (She goes back
into the women's quarters of the Palace. The CHORUS now begins to
sing.)  

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS O Zeus, 
What end to these woes? 
What escape from the Fate 
Which oppresses our lords? 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Will none come forth? 
Must I shear my hair? 
Must we wrap ourselves 
In black mourning folds? 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS It is certain, O friends, it is certain?

But still let us cry to the Gods; 
Very great is the power of the Gods. 

CHORUS O King, O Healer, 
Seek out appeasement 
To Admetus's agony! 
Grant this, Oh, grant it! 
Once before did you find it; 
Now once more 
Be the Releaser from death. 
The Restrainer of blood-drenched Hades! 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Alas! 
O son of Pheres. 
What ills shall you suffer 
Being robbed of your spouse! 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS At sight of such woes 
Shall we cut our throats? 
Shall we slip 
A dangling noose round our necks? 

CHORUS See! See! 
She comes 
From the house with her lord! 
Cry out, Oh, lament. 
O land of Pherae, 
For the best of women 
Fades away in her doom 
Under the earth, 
To dark Hades!  (From the central door of the Palace comes a splendid
but tragical procession. Preceded by the royal guards, ADMETUS enters,
supporting ALCESTIS. The two children, a boy and a girl, cling to
their mother's dress. There is a train of attendants and waiting women,
who bring a low throne for the fainting ALCESTIS.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS  (chanting) Never shall I say that we ought
to rejoice in marriage, but rather weep; this have I seen from of
old and now I look upon the fate of the King, who loses the best of
wives, and henceforth until the end his life shall be intolerable.

ALCESTIS  (chanting) Sun, and you, light of day, 
Vast whirlings of swift cloud! 

ADMETUS The sun looks upon you and me, both of us miserable, who
have wrought nothing against the Gods to deserve death. 

ALCESTIS  (chanting) O Earth, O roof-tree of my home, 
Bridal-bed of my country, Iolcus! 

ADMETUS Rouse up, O unhappy one, and, do not leave me! Call upon
the mighty Gods to pity! 

ALCESTIS  (starting up and gazing wildly in terror, chanting) I see
the two-oared boat, 
I see the boat on the lake! 
And Charon, 
Ferryman of the Dead, 
Calls to me, his hand on the oar: 
'Why linger? Hasten! You delay me!' 
Angrily he urges me. 

ADMETUS Alas! How bitter to me is that ferrying of which you speak!
O my unhappy one, how we suffer! 

ALCESTIS  (chanting) He drags me, he drags me away- 
Do you not see?- 
To the House of the Dead, 
The Winged One 
Glaring under dark brows, 
Hades!- 
What is it you do? 
Set me free!- 
What a path must I travel, 
O most hapless of women! 

ADMETUS O piteous to those that love you, above all to me and to
these children who sorrow in this common grief! 

ALCESTIS  (chanting) Loose me, Oh, loose me now; 
Lay me down; 
All strength is gone from my feet.  (She falls back in the throne.)
Hades draws near! 
Dark night falls on my eyes, 
My children, my children, 
Never more, Oh, never more 
Shall your mother be yours! 
O children, farewell, 
Live happy in the light of day! 

ADMETUS  (chanting) Alas! I hear this unhappy speech, and for me
it is worse than all death. Ah! By the Gods, do not abandon me! Ah!
By our children, whom you leave motherless, take heart! If you die,
I become as nothing; in you we have our life and death; we revere
your love. 

ALCESTIS  (recovering herself) Admetus, you see the things I suffer;
and now before I die I mean to tell you what I wish. 

To show you honour and-at the cost of my life-that you may still behold
the light, I die; and yet I might have lived and wedded any in Thessaly
I chose, and dwelt with happiness in a royal home. But, torn from
you, I would not live with fatherless children, nor have I hoarded
up those gifts of youth in which I found delight. Yet he who begot
you, she who brought you forth, abandoned you when it had been beautiful
in them to die, beautiful to die with dignity to save their son! They
had no child but you, no hope if you were dead that other children
might be born to them. Thus I should have lived my life out, and you
too, and you would not lament as now, made solitary from your wife,
that you must rear our children motherless! 

But these things are a God's doing and are thus. 
Well! Do not forget this gift, for I shall ask-not a recompense, since
nothing is more precious than life, but-only what is just, as you
yourself will say, since if you have not lost your senses you must
love these children no less than I. Let them be masters in my house;
marry not again, and set a stepmother over them, a woman harsher than
I, who in her jealousy will lift her hand against my children and
yours. Ah! not this, let not this be, I entreat you! The new stepmother
hates the first wife's children, the viper itself is not more cruel.
The son indeed finds a strong rampart in his father-but you, my daughter,
how shall you live your virgin life out in happiness? How will you
fare with your father's new wife? Ah! Let her not cast evil report
upon you and thus wreck your marriage in the height of your youth!
You will have no mother, O my child, to give you in marriage, to comfort
you in childbed when none is tenderer than a mother! 

And I must die. Not to-morrow. nor to-morrow's morrow comes this misfortune
on me, but even now I shall be named with those that are no more.
Farewell! Live happy! You, my husband, may boast you had the best
of wives; and you, my children, that you lost the best of mothers!
(She falls back.)  

LEADER Take heart! I do not hesitate to speak for him. This he will
do, unless he has lost his senses. 

ADMETUS It shall be so, it shall be! Have no fear! And since I held
you living as my wife, so, when dead, you only shall be called my
wife, and in your place no bride of Thessaly shall salute me hers;
no other woman is noble enough for that, no other indeed so beautiful
of face. My children shall suffice me; I pray the Gods I may enjoy
them, since you we have not enjoyed. 

I shall wear mourning for you, O my wife, not for one year but all
my days, abhorring the woman who bore me, hating my father-for they
loved me in words, not deeds. But you-to save my life you give the
dearest thing you have! Should I not weep then, losing such a wife
as you? 

I shall make an end of merry drinking parties, and of flower-crowned
feasts and of the music which possessed my house. Never again shall
I touch the lyre, never again shall I raise my spirits to sing to
the Libyan flute-for you have taken from me all my joy. Your image,
carven by the skilled hands of artists, shall be laid in our marriage-bed;
I shall clasp it, and my hands shall cling to it and I shall speak
your name and so, not having you, shall think I have my dear wife
in my arms-a cold delight, I know, but it will lighten the burden
of my days. Often you will gladden me, appearing in my dreams; for
sweet it is to look on those we love in dreams, however brief the
night. 

Ah! If I had the tongue and song of Orpheus so that I might charm
Demeter's Daughter or her Lord, and snatch you back from Hades, would
go down to hell; and neither Pluto's dog nor Charon, Leader of the
Dead, should hinder me until I had brought your life back to the light!

At least await me there whenever I shall die, and prepare the house
where you will dwell with me. I shall lay a solemn charge upon these
children to stretch me in the same cedar shroud with you, and lay
my side against your side; for even in death let me not be separate
from you, you who alone were faithful to me! 

LEADER  (to ADMETUS) And I also will keep this sad mourning with
you, as a friend with a friend; for she is worthy of it.

ALCESTIS O my children, you have heard your father say that never
will he set another wife over you and never thus insult me.

ADMETUS Again I say it, and will perform it too! 

ALCESTIS  (placing the children's hands in his) Then take these children
from my hand. 

ADMETUS I take them-dear gifts from a dear hand. 

ALCESTIS Now you must be the mother for me to my children.

ADMETUS It must be so, since they are robbed of you. 

ALCESTIS O children, I should have lived my life out-and I go to
the Underworld. 

ADMETUS Alas! What shall I do, left alone by you? 

ALCESTIS Time will console you. The dead are nothing. 

ADMETUS Take me with you, by the Gods! Take me to the Underworld!

ALCESTIS It is enough that I should die-for you. 

ADMETUS O Fate, what a wife you steal from me! 

ALCESTIS  (growing faint) My dimmed eyes are heavily oppressed.

ADMETUS O woman, I am lost if you leave me! 

ALCESTIS You may say of me that I am nothing. 

ADMETUS Lift up your head! Do not abandon your children!

ALCESTIS Ah! Indeed it is unwillingly-but, farewell, my children!

ADMETUS Look at them, look.... 

ALCESTIS I am nothing. 

ADMETUS What are you doing? Are you leaving me? 

ALCESTIS  (falling back dead) Farewell. 

ADMETUS  (staring at the body) Wretch that I am, I am lost!

LEADER She is gone! The wife of Admetus is no more. 

EUMELUS  (chanting) Ah! Misery! 
Mother has gone, 
Gone to the Underworld! 
She lives no more, 
O my Father, 
In the sunlight. 
O sad one, 
You have left us 
To live motherless! 

See, Oh, see her eyelids 
And her drooping hands! 
Mother, Mother, 
Hearken to me, listen, 
I beseech you! 
I-I-Mother!- 
I am calling to you, 
Your little bird fallen upon your face! 

ADMETUS She hears not, she sees not. You and I are smitten by a dread
calamity. 

EUMELUS  (chanting) Father, I am a child, 
And I am left 
Like a lonely ship 
By the mother I loved. 
Oh! The cruel things I suffer! 
And you, little sister, 
Suffer with me. 

O my Father, 
Vain, vain was your wedding, 
You did not walk with her 
To the end of old age. 
She died first; 
And your death, O Mother, 
Destroys our house. 

LEADER Admetus, you must endure this calamity. You are not the first
and will not be the last to lose a noble wife. We all are doomed to
die. 

ADMETUS I know it. 
Not unawares did this woe swoop down on me; for long it has gnawed
at me. 

But, since I shall ordain the funeral rites for this dead body, you
must be there, and meanwhile let a threnody re-echo to the implacable
God of the Underworld. And all you men of Thessaly whom I rule-I order
you to share the mourning for this woman with severed hair and black-robed
garb. You who yoke the four-horsed chariot and the swift single horses,
cut the mane from their necks with your steel. 

Let there be no noise of flutes or lyre within the city until twelve
moons are fulfilled. Never shall I bury another body so dear to me,
never one that has loved me better. From me she deserves all honour,
since she alone would die for me!  (The body of ALCESTIS is carried
solemnly into the Palace, followed by ADMETUS, With bowed head, holding
one of his children by each hand. When all have entered, the great
doors are quietly shut.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

O Daughter of Pelias, 
Hail to you in the house of Hades, 
In the sunless home where you shall dwell! 
Let Hades, the dark-haired God, 
Let the old man, Leader of the Dead, 
Who sits at the oar and helm, 
Know you: 
Far, far off is the best of women 
Borne beyond the flood of Acheron 
In the two-oared boat! 

(antistrophe 1)

Often shall the Muses' servants 
Sing of you to the seven-toned 
Lyre-shell of the mountain-tortoise, 
And praise you with mourning songs at Sparta 
When the circling season 
Brings back the month Carneius 
Under the nightlong upraised moon, 
And in bright glad Athens. 
Such a theme do you leave by your death 
For the music of singers! 

(strophe 2)

Ah! That I had the power 
To bring you back to the light 
From the dark halls of Hades, 
And from the waves of Cocytus 
With the oar of the river of hell 
Oh, you only, 
O dearest of women, 
You only dared give your life 
For the life of your lord in Hades! 
Light rest the earth above you, 
O woman. 
If your lord choose another bridal-bed 
He shall be hateful to me 
As to your own children. 

(antistrophe 2)

When his mother 
And the old father that begot him 
Would not give their bodies to the earth 
For their son's sake, 
They dared not deliver him-O cruel! 
Though their heads were grey. 
But you, 
In your lively youth, 
Died for him, and are gone from the light! 
Ah! might I be joined 
With a wife so dear! 
But in life such fortune is rare. 
How happy were my days with her!  (From the left HERACLES enters.
He is black-bearded and of great physical strength; he wears a lion-skin
over his shoulders and carries a large club.)  

HERACLES  (with a gesture of salutation) Friends, dwellers in the
lands of Pherae, do I find Admetus in his home? 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS The son of Pheres is in his home, O Heracles.
But, tell us, what brings you to the land of Thessaly and to the city
of Pherae? 

HERACLES I have a task I must achieve for Eurystheus of Tiryns.

LEADER Where do you go? To what quest are you yoked? 

HERACLES The quest of the four-horsed chariot of Diomedes, the Thracian.

LEADER But how will you achieve it? Do you know this stranger?

HERACLES No, I have never been to the land of the Bistones.

LEADER You cannot obtain the horses without a struggle.

HERACLES I cannot renounce my labours. 

LEADER You must kill to return, or you will remain there dead.

HERACLES It will not be the first contest I have risked.

LEADER And if you conquer the King will you gain anything?

HERACLES I shall bring back his foals to the lord of Tiryns.

LEADER It is not easy to thrust the bit into their jaws.

HERACLES Only if they breathe fire from their nostrils!

LEADER But they tear men with their swift jaws. 

HERACLES You speak of the food of wild mountain beasts, not of horses.

LEADER You may see their mangers foul with blood. 

HERACLES Of what father does the breeder boast himself the son?

LEADER Of Ares, the lord of the gold-rich shield of Thrace!

HERACLES In this task once more you remind me of my fate, which is
ever upon harsh steep ways, since I must join battle with the sons
of Ares-first with Lycaon, then with Cycnus, and now in this third
contest I am come to match myself with these steeds and their master!

LEADER But see, the lord of this land, Admetus himself, comes from
the house!  (The central doors of the Palace have opened, and ADMETUS
comes slowly on the Stage, preceded and followed by guards and attendants.
The King has put off all symbols of royalty, and is dressed in black.
His tong hair is clipped close to his head. ADMETUS dissembles his
grief throughout this scene, in obedience to the laws of hospitality,
which were particularly reverenced in Thessaly.)  

ADMETUS Hail Son of Zeus and of the blood of Perseus! 

HERACLES And hail to you, Admetus, lord of the Thessalians

ADMETUS May it be so! I know your friendship well. 

HERACLES What means this shorn hair, this mourning robe?

ADMETUS To-day I must bury a dead body. 

HERACLES May a God avert harm from your children! 

ADMETUS The children I have begotten are alive in the house.

HERACLES Your father was ripe for death-if it is he has gone?

ADMETUS He lives-and she who brought me forth, O Heracles.

HERACLES Your wife-Alcestis-she is not dead? 

ADMETUS  (evasively) Of her I might make a double answer.

HERACLES Do you mean that she is dead or alive? 

ADMETUS  (ambiguously) She is and is not-and for this I grieve.

HERACLES  (perplexed) I am no wiser-you speak obscurely.

ADMETUS Did you not know the fate which must befall her?

HERACLES I know she submitted to die for you. 

ADMETUS How then can she be alive, having consented to this?

HERACLES Ah! Do not weep for your wife till that time comes.

ADMETUS Those who are about to die are dead, and the dead are nothing.

HERACLES Men hold that to be and not to be are different things.

ADMETUS You hold for one, Heracles, and I for the other.

HERACLES Whom, then, do you mourn? Which of your friends is dead?

ADMETUS A woman. We spoke of her just now. 

HERACLES  (mistaking his meaning) A stranger? Or one born of your
kin? 

ADMETUS A stranger, but one related to this house. 

HERACLES But how, then, did she chance to die in your house?

ADMETUS When her father died she was sheltered here. 

HERACLES Alas! Would I had not found you in this grief, Admetus!

ADMETUS What plan are you weaving with those words? 

HERACLES I shall go to the hearth of another friend. 

ADMETUS Not so, O King! This wrong must not be. 

HERACLES  (hesitating) The coming of a guest is troublesome to those
who mourn. 

ADMETUS  (decisively) The dead are dead. Enter my house.

HERACLES But it is shameful to feast among weeping friends.

ADMETUS We shall put you in the guest-rooms, which are far apart.

HERACLES Let me go, and I will give you a thousand thanks.

ADMETUS No, you shall not go to another man's hearth.  (To a servant)
Guide him, and open for him the guest-rooms apart from the house.
(HERACLES enters the Palace by the guests' door; when he has gone
in, ADMETUS turns to the other servants)  Close the inner door of
the courtyard; it is unseemly that guests rejoicing at table should
hear lamentations, and be saddened.  (The attendants go into the Palace.)

LEADER What are you about? When such a calamity has fallen upon you,
Admetus, have you the heart to entertain a guest? Are you mad?

ADMETUS And if I had driven away a guest who came to my house and
city, would you have praised me more? No, indeed! My misfortune would
have been no less, and I inhospitable. One more ill would have been
added to those I have if my house were called inhospitable. I myself
find him the best of hosts when I enter the thirsty land of Argos.

LEADER But why did you hide from him the fate that has befallen,
if the man came as a friend, as you say? 

ADMETUS Never would he have entered my house if he had guessed my
misfortune. 

To some, I know, I shall appear senseless in doing this, and they
will blame me; but my roof knows not to reject or insult a guest.
(He goes into the Palace, as the CHORUS begins its song.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

O house of a bountiful lord, 
Ever open to many guests, 
The God of Pytho, 
Apollo of the beautiful lyre, 
Deigned to dwell in you 
And to live a shepherd in your lands! 
On the slope of the hillsides 
He played melodies of mating 
On the Pipes of Pan to his herds. 

(antistrophe 1)

And the dappled lynxes fed with them 
In joy at your singing; 
From the wooded vale of Orthrys 
Came a yellow troop of lions; 
To the sound of your lyre, O Phoebus, 
Danced the dappled fawn 
Moving on light feet 
Beyond the high-crested pines, 
Charmed by your sweet singing. 

(strophe 2)

He dwells in a home most rich in flocks 
By the lovely moving Boebian lake. 
At the dark stabling-place of the Sun 
He takes the sky of the Molossians 
As a bourne to his ploughing of fields, 
To the soils of his plains; 
He bears sway 
As far as the harbourless 
Coast of the Aegean Sea, 
As far as Pelion. 

(antistrophe 2)

Even to-day he opened his house 
And received a guest, 
Though his eyelids were wet 
With tears wept by the corpse 
Of a dear bedfellow dead in the house. 
For the noble spirit is proclaimed by honour; 
All wisdom lies with the good. 
I admire him: 
And in my soul I know 
The devout man shall have joy.  (The funeral procession of ALCESTIS
enters from the door of the women's quarters. The body, carried on
a bier by men servants, is followed by ADMETUS and his two children.
Behind them comes a train of attendants and servants carrying the
funeral offerings. All are in mourning. ADMETUS addresses the CHORUS.)

ADMETUS O friendly presence of you men of Pherae! Now that the body
is prepared, and the servants bear it on high to the tomb and the
fire, do you, as is fitting, salute the dead as she goes forth on
her last journey.  (PHERES, the father of ADMETUS, enters, followed
by attendants bearing funeral offerings.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS But I see your father, tottering with an old
man's walk, and his followers bearing in their hands for your wife
garments as an offering to the dead. 

PHERES My son, I have come to share your sorrow, for the wife you
have lost was indeed noble and virtuous-none can deny it. But these
things must be endured, however intolerable they may be.

Take these garments, and let her descend under the earth. Her body
must be honoured, for she died to save your life, my son; she has
not made me childless, nor left me to be destroyed without you in
my hapless old age; and she has given glorious fame to all women by
daring so noble a deed!  (He lifts his hand in salutation to the body
of ALCESTIS.)  O woman, who saved my son, who raised me up when I
had fallen, hail! Be happy in the halls of Hades! I declare it-such
marriages are profitable to mankind; otherwise, it is foolish to marry.

ADMETUS  (furiously) It was not my wish that you should come to this
burial, and I deny that your presence is that of a friend! She shall
never wear these garments of yours; she needs not your gifts for her
burial. You should have grieved when I was, about to die; but you
stood aside, and now do you come to wail over a corpse when you, an
old man, allowed a young woman to die? 

Were you in very truth father of this body of mine? Did she, who claims
to be and is called my mother, bring me forth? Or was I bred of a
slave's seed and secretly brought to your wife's breast? You have
proved what you are when it comes to the test, and therefore I am
not your begotten son; or you surpass all men in cowardice, for, being
at the very verge and end of life, you had neither courage nor will
to die for your son. But this you left to a woman, a stranger, whom
alone I hold as my father and my mother! 

Yet it had been a beautiful deed in you to die for your son, and short
indeed was the time left you to live. She and I would have lived out
our lives, and I should not now be here alone lamenting my misery.

You enjoyed all that a happy man can enjoy-you passed the flower of
your age as a king, and in me your son you had an heir to your dominion;
you would not have died childless, leaving an orphaned house to be
plundered by strangers. You will not say that you abandoned me to
death because I dishonoured your old age, for above all I was respectful
to you-and this is the gratitude I have from you and my mother!

Beget more sons, and quickly, to cherish your old age and wrap you
in a shroud when dead and lay your body out in state! This hand of
mine shall not inter you. I am dead to you. I look upon the light
of day because another saved me-I say I am her son, and will cherish
her old age! 

Vainly do old men pray for death, regretting their age and the long
span of life. If death draws near, none wants to die, and age is no
more a burden to him. 

LEADER Admetus! The present misfortune is enough. Do not provoke
your father's spirit.  (ADMETUS turns angrily to depart, but PHERES
prevents him.)  

PHERES My son, do you think you are pursuing some hireling Lydian
or Phrygian with your taunts? Do you know I am a Thessalian, a free
man lawfully begotten by a Thessalian father? You are over-insolent,
and you shall not leave thus, after wounding me with your boyish insults.
I indeed begot you, and bred you up to be lord of this land, but I
am not bound to die for you. It is not a law of our ancestors or of
Hellas that the fathers should die for the children! You were born
to live your own life, whether miserable or fortunate; and what is
due to you from me you have. You rule over many men, and I shall leave
you many wide fields even as received them from my own father. How,
then, have I wronged you? Of what have I robbed you? Do not die for
me, any more than I die for you. You love to look upon the light of
day-do you think your father hates it? I tell myself that we are a
long time underground and that life is short, but sweet.

But you-you strove shamelessly not to die, and you are alive, you
shirked your fate by killing her! And you call me a coward, you, the
worst of cowards, surpassed by a woman who died for you, pretty boy?
And now you insult those who should be dear to you, when they refuse
to die for a coward like you! 

Be silent! Learn that if you love your life, so do others. If you
utter insults, you shall hear many, and true ones too! 

LEADER These insults and those that went before suffice. Old man,
cease to revile your son. 

ADMETUS  (to PHERES) Speak on! I shall refute you. If the truth wounds
you when you hear it you should not have wronged me. 

PHERES I should have wronged you far more if I had died for you.

ADMETUS It is the same then to die an old man and in the flower of
life? 

PHERES We should live one life, not two. 

ADMETUS May you live longer than God! 

PHERES Do you curse your parents when they have done you no wrong?

ADMETUS I see you are in love with long life. 

PHERES But you are not carrying her dead body in place of your own?

ADMETUS It is the proof of your cowardice, O worst of men.

PHERES You cannot say she died for me! 

ADMETUS Alas! May you one day need my help. 

PHERES Woo many women, so that more may die for you. 

ADMETUS To your shame be it-you who dared not die. 

PHERES Sweet is the daylight of the Gods, very sweet. 

ADMETUS Your spirit is mean, not a man's. 

PHERES Would you laugh to carry an old man's body to the grave?

ADMETUS You will die infamous, whenever you die. 

PHERES It will matter little enough to me to hear ill of myself when
I am dead! 

ADMETUS Alas! Alas! full of impudence. is old age! 

PHERES She was not impudent, but foolish, 

ADMETUS Go! Leave me to bury her body. 

PHERES  (turning away) I go. You, her murderer, will bury her-but
soon you must render an account to her relatives. Acastus is not a
man if he fails to avenge his sister's blood on you!  (PHERES goes
out by the way he entered, followed by his attendants. ADMETUS gazes
angrily after him.)  

ADMETUS Go with a curse, you, and she who dwells with you! Grow old,
as you ought, childless though you have a child. You shall never return
to this house. And if I could renounce your hearth as my father's
by heralds, I would do it. But we-since this sorrow must be endured-let
us go, and set her body on the funeral pyre.  (The Procession moves
slowly along the stage, and is joined by the CHORUS. As they pass,
the LEADER salutes the body of ALCESTIS.)  

LEADER  (chanting) Alas! Alas! You who suffer for your courage, O
noblest and best of women, hail! May Hermes of the Dead, may Hades,
greet you kindly. If there are rewards for the dead, may you share
them as you sit by the bride of the Lord of the Dead!  (The Procession
has filed out. A servant in mourning hurries out from the guests'
quarters.)  

SERVANT Many guests from every land, I know, have come to the Palace
of Admetus, and I have set food before them, but never one worse than
this guest have I welcomed to the hearth. 

First, though he saw our Lord was in mourning, he entered, and dared
to pass through the gates. Then, knowing our misfortune, he did not
soberly accept what was offered him, but if anything was not served
to him he ordered us to bring it. In both hands he took a cup of ivy-wood,
and drank the unmixed wine of the dark grape-mother, until he was
encompassed and heated with the flame of wine. He crowned his head
with myrtle sprays, howling discordant songs. There was he caring
nothing for Admetus's misery, and we servants weeping for our Queen;
and yet we hid our tear-laden eyes from the guest, for so Admetus
had commanded. 

And now in the Palace I must entertain this stranger, some villainous
thief and brigand, while she, the Queen I mourn, has gone from the
house unfollowed, unsaluted, she who was as a mother to me and all
us servants, for she sheltered us from a myriad troubles by softening
her husband's wrath. 

Am I not right, then, to hate this stranger, who came to us in the
midst of sorrow?  (HERACLES comes from the Palace. He is drunkenly
merry, with a myrtle wreath on his head, and a large cup and wine-skin
in his hands. He staggers a little.)  

HERACLES Hey, you! Why so solemn and anxious? A servant should not
be sullen with guests, but greet them with a cheerful heart.

You see before you a man who is your lord's friend, and you greet
him with a gloomy, frowning face, because of your zeal about a strange
woman's death. Come here, and let me make you a little wiser!  (With
drunken gravity)  Know the nature of human life? Don't think you do.
You couldn't. Listen to me. All mortals must die. Isn't one who knows
if he'll be alive to-morrow morning. Who knows where Fortune will
lead? Nobody can teach it. Nobody learn it by rules. So, rejoice in
what you hear, and learn from me! Count each day as it comes as Life-and
leave the rest to Fortune. Above all, honour the Love Goddess, sweetest
of all the Gods to mortal men, a kindly goddess! Put all the rest
aside. Trust in what I say, if you think I speak truth-as I believe.
Get rid of this gloom, rise superior to Fortune. Crown yourself with
flowers and drink with me, won't you? I know the regular clink of
the wine-cup will row you from darkness and gloom to another haven.
Mortals should think mortal thoughts. To all solemn and frowning men,
life I say is not life, but a disaster. 

SERVANT We know all that, but what we endure here to-day is far indeed
from gladness and laughter. 

HERACLES But the dead woman was a stranger. Lament not overmuch,
then, for the Lords of this Palace are still alive. 

SERVANT How, alive? Do you not know the misery of this house?

HERACLES Your lord did not lie to me? 

SERVANT He goes too far in hospitality! 

HERACLES But why should I suffer for a stranger's death?

SERVANT It touches this house only too nearly. 

HERACLES Did he hide some misfortune from me? 

SERVANT Go in peace! The miseries of our lords concern us.

HERACLES That speech does not imply mourning for a stranger!

SERVANT No, or I should not have been disgusted to see you drinking.

HERACLES Have I then been basely treated by my host? 

SERVANT You did not come to this house at a welcome hour. We are
in mourning. You see my head is shaved and the black garments I wear.

HERACLES But who, then, is dead? One of the children? The old father?

SERVANT O stranger, Admetus no longer has a wife. 

HERACLES What! And yet I was received in this way? 

SERVANT He was ashamed to send you away from his house.

HERACLES O hapless one! What a wife you have lost! 

SERVANT Not she alone, but all of us are lost. 

HERACLES  (now completely sobered) I felt there was something when
I saw his tear-wet eyes, his shaven head, his distracted look. But
he persuaded me he was taking the body of a stranger to the grave.
Against my will I entered these ates, and drank in the home of this
generous man-and he in such grief! And shall I drink at such a time
with garlands of flowers on my head? You, why did you not tell me
that such misery had come upon this house? Where is he burying her?
Where shall I find him? 

SERVANT Beside the straight road which leads to Larissa you will
see a tomb of polished stone outside the walls.  (Returns to the servants'
quarters)  

HERACLES O heart of me, much-enduring heart, O right arm, now indeed
must you show what son was born to Zeus by Alcmena, the Tirynthian,
daughter of Electryon! For I must save this dead woman, and bring
back Alcestis to this house as a grace to Admetus. 

I shall watch for Death, the black-robed Lord of the Dead, and I know
I shall find him near the tomb, drinking the blood of the sacrifices.
If can leap upon him from an ambush, seize him, grasp him in my arms,
no power in the world shall tear his bruised sides from me until he
has yielded up this woman. If I miss my prey, if he does not come
near the bleeding sacrifice, I will go down to Kore and her lord in
their sunless dwelling, and I will make my entreaty to them, and I
know they will give me Alcestis to bring back to the hands of the
host who welcomed me, who did not repulse me from his house, though
he was smitten with heavy woe which most nobly he hid from me! Where
would be a warmer welcome in Thessaly or in all the dwellings of Hellas?

He shall not say he was generous to an ingrate!  (HERACLES goes out.
Presently ADMETUS and his attendants, followed by the CHORUS, return
from the burial of ALCESTIS.)  

ADMETUS  (chanting) Alas! 
Hateful approach, hateful sight of my widowed house! Oh me! Oh me!
Alas! Whither shall I go? Where rest? What can I say? What refrain
from saying? Why can I not die? Indeed my mother bore me for a hapless
fate. I envy the dead, I long to be with them, theirs are the dwellings
where I would be. Without pleasure I look upon the light of day and
set my feet upon the earth-so precious a hostage has Death taken from
me to deliver unto Hades! 

CHORUS  (chanting responsively with ADMETUS) Go forward,

Enter your house. 

ADMETUS Alas! 

CHORUS Your grief deserves our tears. 

ADMETUS O Gods! 

CHORUS I know you have entered into sorrow. 

ADMETUS Woe! Woe! 

CHORUS Yet you bring no aid to the dead. 

ADMETUS Oh me! Oh me! 

CHORUS Heavy shall it be for you 
Never to look again 
On the face of the woman you love. 

ADMETUS You bring to my mind the grief that breaks my heart. What
sorrow is worse for a man than the loss of such a woman? I would I
had never married, never shared my house with her. I envy the wifeless
and the childless. They live but one life-what is suffering to them?
But the sickness of children, bridal-beds ravished by Death-dreadful!
when we might be wifeless and childless to the end. 

CHORUS Chance, dreadful Chance, has stricken you. 

ADMETUS Alas! 

CHORUS But you set no limit to your grief. 

ADMETUS Ah! Gods! 

CHORUS A heavy burden to bear, and yet... 

ADMETUS Woe! Woe! 

CHORUS Courage! You are not the first to lose... 

ADMETUS Oh me! Oh me! 

CHORUS A wife. 
Different men 
Fate crushes with different blows. 

ADMETUS O long grief and mourning for those beloved under the earth!

Why did you stay me from casting myself into the hollow grave to lie
down for ever in death by the best of women? Two lives, not one, had
then been seized by Hades, most faithful one to the other; and together
we should have crossed the lake of the Underworld. 

CHORUS A son most worthy of tears 
Was lost to one of my house, 
Yet, childless, he suffered with courage, 
Though the white was thick in his hair 
And his days were far-spent! 

ADMETUS O visage of my house! How shall I enter you? How shall I
dwell in you, now that Fate has turned its face from me? How great
is the change! Once, of old, I entered my house with marriage-songs
and the torches of Pelion, holding a loved woman by the hand, followed
by a merry crowd shouting good wishes to her who is dead and to me,
because we had joined our lives, being both noble and born of noble
lines. Today, in place of marriage-songs are lamentations; instead
of white garments I am clad in mourning, to return to my house and
a solitary bed. 

CHORUS Grief has fallen upon you 
In the midst of a happy life 
Untouched by misfortune. 
But your life and your spirit are safe. 
She is dead, 
She has left your love. 
Is this so new? 
Ere now many men 
Death has severed from wives. 

ADMETUS  (speaking) O friends, whatsoever may be thought by others,
to me it seems that my wife's fate is happier than mine. Now, no pain
ever shall touch her again; she has reached the noble end of all her
sufferings. But I, I who should have died, I have escaped my fate,
only to drag out a wretched life. Only now do I perceive it.

How shall I summon strength to enter this house? Whom shall I greet?
Who will greet me in joy at my coming? Whither shall I turn my steps?
I shall be driven forth by solitude when I see my bed widowed of my
wife, empty the chairs on which she sat, a dusty floor beneath my
roof, my children falling at my knees and calling for their mother,
and the servants lamenting for the noble lady lost from the house!

Such will be my life within the house. Without, I shall be driven
from marriage-feasts and gatherings of the women of Thessaly. I shall
not endure to look upon my wife's friends. Those who hate me will
say: 'See how he lives in shame, the man who dared not die, the coward
who gave his wife to Hades in his stead! Is that a man? He hates his
parents, yet he himself refused to die!' 

This evil fame I have added to my other sorrows. O my friends, what
then avails it that I live, if I must live in misery and shame?  (He
covers his head with his robe, and crouches in abject misery on the
steps of his Palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

I have lived with the Muses 
And on lofty heights: 
Many doctrines have I learned; 
But Fate is above us all. 
Nothing avails against Fate 
Neither the Thracian tablets 
Marked with Orphic symbols, 
Nor the herbs given by Phoebus 
To the children of Asclepius 
To heal men of their sickness. 

(antistrophe 1)

None can come near to her altars, 
None worship her statues; 
She regards not our sacrifice. 
O sacred goddess, 
Bear no more hardly upon me 
Than in days overpast! 
With a gesture Zeus judges, 
But the sentence is yours. 
Hard iron yields to your strength; 
Your fierce will knows not gentleness. 

(strophe 2)

And the Goddess has bound you 
Ineluctably in the gyves of her hands. 
Yield. 
Can your tears give life to the dead? 
For the sons of the Gods 
Swoon in the shadow of Death. 
Dear was she in our midst, 
Dear still among the dead, 
For the noblest of women was she 
Who lay in your bed. 

(antistrophe 2)

Ah! 
Let the grave of your spouse 
Be no more counted as a tomb, 
But revered as the Gods, 
And greeted by all who pass by! 
The wanderer shall turn from his path, 
Saying: 'She died for her lord; 
A blessed spirit she is now. 
Hail, O sacred lady, be our friend!' 
Thus shall men speak of her.  (ADMETUS is still crouched on the Palace
steps, when HERACLES enters from the side, leading a veiled woman.)

LEADER OF THE CHORUS But see! The son of Alcmena, as I think, comes
to your house.  (ADMETUS uncovers his head, and faces the newcomer.)

HERACLES Admetus, a man should speak freely to his friends, and not
keep reproaches silent in his heart. Since I was near you in your
misfortune, should have wished to show myself your friend. But you
did not tell me the dead body was your wife's, and you took me into
your house as if you were in mourning only for a stranger. And I put
a garland of flowers upon my head, and poured wine-offerings to the
Gods, when your house was filled with lamentation. I blame you, yes,
I blame you for this-but I will not upbraid you in your misfortune.

Why I turned back and am here, I shall tell you. Take and keep this
woman for me until I have slain the King of the Bistones and return
here with the horses of Thrace. If ill happens to me-may I return
safely!-I give her to you to serve in your house. 

With much striving I won her to my hands. On my way I found public
games, worthy of athletes, and I have brought back this woman whom
I won as the prize of victory. The winners of the easy tests had horses;
heads of cattle were given to those who won in boxing and wrestling.
Then came a woman as a prize. Since I was present, it would have been
shameful for me to miss this glorious gain. Therefore, as I said,
you must take care of this woman, whom I bring to you, not as one
stolen but as the prize of my efforts. Perhaps in time you will approve
of what I do. 

ADMETUS Not from disdain, nor to treat you as a foe, did I conceal
my wife's fate from you. But if you had turned aside to another man's
hearth, one more grief had been added to my sorrow. It was enough
that I should weep my woe. 

This woman-O King, I beg it may be thus-enjoin some other Thessalian,
one who is not in sorrow, to guard her. In Pherae there are many to
welcome you. Do not remind me of my grief. Seeing her in my house,
I could not restrain my tears. Add not a further anguish to my pain,
for what I suffer is too great. And then-where could I harbour a young
woman in my house? For she is young-I see by her clothes and jewels.
Could she live with the men under my roof? How, then, could she remain
chaste, if she moved to and fro among the young men? Heracles, it
is not easy to restrain the young....I am thinking of your interests....Must
I take her to my dead wife's room? How could I endure her to enter
that bed? I fear a double reproach-from my people, who would accuse
me of betraying my saviour to slip into another woman's bed, and from
my dead wife, who deserves my respect, for which I must take care.

O woman, whosoever you may be, you have the form of Alcestis, and
your body is like hers. 

Ah! By all the Gods, take her from my sight! Do not insult a broken
man. When I look upon her-she seems my wife-my heart is torn asunder-tears
flow from my eyes. Miserable creature that I am, now taste the bitterness
of my sorrow. 

LEADER I do not praise this meeting; but, whatever happens, we must
accept the gifts of the Gods. 

HERACLES Oh, that I might bring your wife back into the light of
day from the dwelling of the Under-Gods, as a gift of grace to you!

ADMETUS I know you would wish this-but to what end? The dead cannot
return to the light of day. 

HERACLES Do not exaggerate, but bear this with decorum.

ADMETUS Easier to advise than bear the test. 

HERACLES How will it aid you to lament for ever? 

ADMETUS I know-but my love whirls me away. 

HERACLES Love for the dead leads us to tears. 

ADMETUS I am overwhelmed beyond words. 

HERACLES You have lost a good wife-who denies it? 

ADMETUS So that for me there is no more pleasure in life.

HERACLES Time will heal this open wound. 

ADMETUS You might say Time, if Time were death! 

HERACLES Another woman, a new marriage, shall console you.

ADMETUS Oh, hush! What have you said? A thing unbelievable!

HERACLES What! You will not marry? Your bed will remain widowed?

ADMETUS No other woman shall ever lie at my side. 

HERACLES Do you think that avails the dead? 

ADMETUS Wherever she may be, I must do her honour. 

HERACLES I praise you-but men will call you mad. 

ADMETUS Yet never more shall I be called a bridegroom. 

HERACLES I praise your faithful love to your wife- 

ADMETUS May I die if I betray her even when dead! 

HERACLES  (offering him the veiled woman's hand.) Receive her then
into your noble house. 

ADMETUS No, by Zeus who begot you, no! 

HERACLES Yet you will do wrong if you do not take her. 

ADMETUS If I do it, remorse will tear my heart. 

HERACLES Yield-perhaps it will be a good thing for you.

ADMETUS Ah! If only you had not won her in the contest!

HERACLES But I conquered-and you conquered with me. 

ADMETUS It is true-but let the woman go hence. 

HERACLES She shall go, if she must. But first-ought she to go?

ADMETUS She must-unless it would anger you. 

HERACLES There is good reason for my zeal. 

ADMETUS You have conquered then-but not for my pleasure.

HERACLES One day you will praise me for it-be persuaded.

ADMETUS  (to his attendants) Lead her in, since she must be received
in this house. 

HERACLES No, I cannot leave such a woman to servants. 

ADMETUS Then lead her in yourself, if you wish. 

HERACLES I must leave her in your hands. 

ADMETUS I must not touch her-let her go into the house.

HERACLES I trust only in your right hand. 

ADMETUS O King, you force me to this against my will. 

HERACLES Put forth your hand and take this woman. 

ADMETUS  (turning aside his head) It is held out. 

HERACLES As if you were cutting off a Gorgon's head! Do you hold
her? 

ADMETUS Yes. 

HERACLES Then keep her. You shall not deny that the son of Zeus is
a grateful guest.  (Takes off the veil and shows ALCESTIS.)  Look
at her, and see if she is not like your wife. And may joy put an end
to all your sorrow! 

ADMETUS  (drops her hand and starts back) O Gods! What am I to say?
Unhoped-for wonder! Do I really look upon my wife? Or I am snared
in the mockery of a God? 

HERACLES No you look upon your wife indeed. 

ADMETUS Beware! May it not be some phantom from the Underworld?

HERACLES Do not think your guest a sorcerer. 

ADMETUS But do I indeed look upon the wife I buried? 

HERACLES Yes-but I do not wonder at your mistrust. 

ADMETUS Can I touch, speak to her, as my living wife? 

HERACLES Speak to her-you have all you desired. 

ADMETUS  (taking ALCESTIS in his arms) O face and body of the dearest
of women! I have you once more, when I thought I should never see
you again! 

HERACLES You have her-may the envy of the Gods be averted from you!

ADMETUS O noble son of greatest Zeus, fortune be yours, and may your
Father guard you! But how did you bring her back from the Underworld
to the light of day? 

HERACLES By fighting with the spirit who was her master.

ADMETUS Then did you contend with Death? 

HERACLES I hid by the tomb and leaped upon him. 

ADMETUS But why is she speechless? 

HERACLES You may not hear her voice until she is purified from her
consecration to the Lower Gods, and until the third dawn has risen.
Lead her in. 

And you, Admetus, show as ever a good man's welcome to your guests.

Farewell! I go to fulfil the task set me by the King, the son of Sthenelus.

ADMETUS Stay with us, and share our hearth. 

HERACLES That may be hereafter, but now I must be gone in haste.
(HERACLES departs.)  

ADMETUS  (gazing after him) Good fortune to you, and come back here!
(To the CHORUS)  In all the city and in the four quarters of Thessaly
let there be choruses to rejoice at this good fortune, and let the
altars smoke with the flesh of oxen in sacrifice! To-day we have changed
the past for a better life. I am happy.  (He leads ALCESTIS into the
Palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Spirits have many shapes, 
Many strange things are performed by the Gods. 
The expected does not always happen, 
And God makes a way for the unexpected. 
So ends this action. 

THEEND
----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the temple of THETIS in Thessaly. ANDROMACHE, dressed as a
suppliant, is clinging to the altar in front of the temple. The palace
of Achilles is nearby.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

ANDROMACHE O city of Thebes, glory of Asia, whence on a day I came
to Priam's princely home with many a rich and costly thing in my dower,
affianced unto Hector to be the mother of his children, I Andromache,
envied name in days of yore, but now of all women that have been or
yet shall be the most unfortunate; for I have lived to see my husband
Hector slain by Achilles, and the babe Astyanax, whom I bore my lord,
hurled from the towering battlements, when the Hellenes sacked our
Trojan home; and I myself am come to Hellas as a slave, though I was
esteemed a daughter of a race most free, given to Neoptolemus that
island-prince, and set apart for him as his special prize from the
spoils of Troy. And here I dwell upon the boundaries of Phthia and
Pharsalia's town, where Thetis erst, the goddess of the sea, abode
with Peleus apart from the world, avoiding the throng of men; wherefore
the folk of Thessaly call it the sacred place of Thetis, in honour
of the goddess's marriage. Here dwells the son of Achilles and suffers
Peleus still to rule Pharsalia, not wishing to assume the sceptre
while the old man lives. Within these halls have borne a boy to the
son of Achilles, my master. Now aforetime for all my misery I ever
had a hope to lead me on, that, if my child were safe, I might find
some help and protection from my woes; but since my lord in scorn
of his bondmaid's charms hath wedded that Spartan Hermione, I am tormented
by her most cruelly; for she saith that I by secret enchantment am
making her barren and distasteful to her husband, and that I design
to take her place in this house, ousting her the rightful mistress
by force; whereas I at first submitted against my will and now have
resigned my place; be almighty Zeus my witness that it was not of
my own free will I became her rival! 

But I cannot convince her, and she longs to kill me, and her father
Menelaus is an accomplice in this. E'en now is he within, arrived
from Sparta for this very purpose, while I in terror am come to take
up position here in the shrine of Thetis adjoining the house, if haply
it may save me from death; for Peleus and his descendants hold it
in honour as symbol of his marriage with the Nereid. My only son am
I secretly conveying to a neighbour's house in fear for his life.
For his sire stands not by my side to lend his aid and cannot avail
his child at all, being absent in the land of Delphi, where he is
offering recompense to Loxias for the madness he committed, when on
a day he went to Pytho and demanded of Phoebus satisfaction for his
father's death, if haply his prayer might avert those past sins and
win for him the god's goodwill hereafter.  (The MAID OF ANDROMACHE
enters.)  

MAID Mistress mine, be sure I do not hesitate to call thee by that
name, seeing that I thought it thy right in thine own house also,
when we dwelt in Troy-land; as I was ever thy friend and thy husband's
while yet he was alive, so now have I come with strange tidings, in
terror lest any of our masters learn hereof but still out of pity
for thee; for Menelaus and his daughter are forming dire plots against
thee, whereof thou must beware. 

ANDROMACHE Ah! kind companion of my bondage, for such thou art to
her, who, erst thy queen, is now sunk in misery; what are they doing?
What new schemes are they devising in their eagerness to take away
my wretched life? 

MAID Alas! poor lady, they intend to slay thy son, whom thou hast
privily conveyed from out the house. 

ANDROMACHE Ah me! Has she heard that my babe was put out of her reach?
Who told her? Woe is me! how utterly undone! 

MAID I know not, but thus much of their schemes I heard myself; and
Menelaus has left the house to fetch him. 

ANDROMACHE Then am I lost; ah, my child! those vultures twain will
take and slay thee; while he who is called thy father lingers still
in Delphi. 

MAID True, for had he been here thou wouldst not have fared so hardly,
am sure; but, as it is, thou art friendless. 

ANDROMACHE Have no tidings come that Peleus may arrive?

MAID He is too old to help thee if he came. 

ANDROMACHE And yet I sent for him more than once. 

MAID Surely thou dost not suppose that any of thy messengers heed
thee? 

ANDROMACHE Why should they? Wilt thou then go for me? 

MAID How shall I explain my long absence from the house?

ANDROMACHE Thou art a woman; thou canst invent a hundred ways.

MAID There is a risk, for Hermione keeps no careless guard.

ANDROMACHE Dost look to that? Thou art disowning thy friends in distress.

MAID Not so; never taunt me with that. I will go, for of a truth
a woman and a slave is not of much account, e'en if aught befall me.
(The MAID withdraws.)  

ANDROMACHE Go then, while I will tell to heaven the lengthy tale
of lamentation, mourning, and weeping, that has ever been my hard
lot; for 'tis woman's way to delight in present misfortunes even to
keeping them always on her tongue and lips. But I have many reasons,
not merely one for tears,-my city's fall, my Hector's death, the hardness
of the lot to which I am bound, since I fell on slavery's evil days
undeservedly. 'Tis never right to call a son of man happy, till thou
hast seen his end, to judge from the way he passes it how he will
descend to that other world.  (She begins to chant.)  'Twas no bride
Paris took with him to the towers of Ilium, but curse to his bed when
he brought Helen to her bower. For her sake, Troy, did eager warriors,
sailing from Hellas in a thousand ships, capture and make thee a prey
to fire and sword; and the son of sea-born Thetis mounted on his chariot
dragged my husband Hector round the walls, ah woe is me! while I was
hurried from my chamber to the beach, with slavery's hateful pall
upon me. And many tear I shed as I left my city, my bridal bower,
and my husband in the dust. Woe, woe is me! why should I prolong my
life, to serve Hermione? Her cruelty it is that drives me hither to
the image of the goddess to throw my suppliant arms about it, melting
to tears as doth a spring that gushes from the rock.  (The CHORUS
OF PHTHIAN WOMEN enters.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Lady, thus keeping thy weary station without pause upon the floor
of Thetis' shrine, Phthian though I am, to thee a daughter of Asia
I come, to see if I can devise some remedy for these perplexing troubles,
which have involved thee and Hermione in fell discord, because to
thy sorrow thou sharest with her the love of Achilles' son.

(antistrophe 1)

Recognize thy position, weigh the present evil into the which thou
art come. Thou art a Trojan captive; thy rival is thy mistress, a
true-born daughter of Sparta. Leave then this home of sacrifice, the
shrine of our sea-goddess. How can it avail thee to waste thy comeliness
and disfigure it by weeping by reason of a mistress's harsh usage?
Might will prevail against thee; why vainly toil in thy feebleness?

(strophe 2)

Come, quit the bright sanctuary of the Nereid divine. Recognize that
thou art in bondage on a foreign soil, in a strange city, where thou
seest none of all thy friends, luckless lady, cast on evil days.

(antistrophe 2)

Yea, I did pity thee most truly, Trojan dame, when thou camest to
this house; but from fear of my mistress I hold my peace, albeit I
sympathize with thee, lest she, whom Zeus's daughter bore, discover
my good will toward thee.  (HERMIONE enters, in complete royal regalia.)

HERMIONE With a crown of golden workmanship upon my head and about
my body this embroidered robe am I come hither; no presents these
I wear from the palace of Achilles or Peleus, but gifts my father
Menelaus gave me together with a sumptuous dower from Sparta in Laconia,
to insure me freedom of speech. Such is my answer to you;  (to the
CHORUS)  but as for thee, slave and captive, thou wouldst fain oust
me and secure this palace for thyself, and thanks to thy enchantment
I am hated by my husband; thou it is that hast made my womb barren
and cheated my hopes; for Asia's daughters have clever heads for such
villainy; yet will I check thee therefrom, nor shall this temple of
the Nereid avail thee aught, no! neither its altar or shrine, but
thou shalt die. But if or god or man should haply wish to save thee,
thou must atone for thy proud thoughts of happier days now past by
humbling thyself and crouching prostrate at my knees, by sweeping
out my halls, and by learning, as thou sprinklest water from a golden
ewer, where thou now art. Here is no Hector, no Priam with his gold,
but a city of Hellas. Yet thou, miserable woman, hast gone so far
in wantonness that thou canst lay thee down with the son of the very
man that slew thy husband, and bear children to the murderer. Such
is all the race of barbarians; father and daughter, mother and son,
sister and brother mate together; the nearest and dearest stain their
path with each other's blood, and no law restrains such horrors. Bring
not these crimes amongst us, for here we count it shame that one man
should have the control of two wives, and men are content to turn
to one lawful love, that is, all who care to live an honourable life.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Women are by nature somewhat jealous, and do
ever show the keenest hate to rivals in their love. 

ANDROMACHE Ah! well-a-day! Youth is a bane to mortals, in every case,
that is, where a man embraces injustice in his early days. Now I am
afraid that my being a slave will prevent thee listening to me in
spite of many a just plea, or if I win my case, I fear I may be damaged
on this very ground, for the high and mighty cannot brook refuting
arguments from their inferiors; still I will not be convicted of betraying
my own cause. Tell me, proud young wife, what assurance can make me
confident of wresting from thee thy lawful lord? Is it that Laconia's
capital yields to Phrygia? is it that my fortune outstrips thine?
or that in me thou seest a free woman? Am I so elated by my youth,
my full healthy figure, the extent of my city, the number of my friends
that I wish to supplant thee in thy home? Is my purpose to take thy
place and rear myself a race of slaves, mere appendages to my misery?
or, supposing thou bear no children, will any one endure that sons
of mine should rule o'er Phthia? Ah no! there is the love that Hellas
bears me, both for Hector's sake and for my own humble rank forsooth,
that never knew a queen's estate in Troy. 'Tis not my sorcery that
makes thy husband hate thee, nay, but thy own failure to prove thyself
his help-meet. Herein lies love's only charm; 'tis not beauty, lady,
but virtuous acts that win our husbands' hearts. And though it gall
thee to be told so, albeit thy city in Laconia is no doubt mighty
fact, yet thou findest no place for his Scyros, displaying wealth
'midst poverty and setting Menelaus above Achilles: and that is what
alienates thy lord. Take heed; for a woman, though bestowed upon worthless
husband, must be with him content, and ne'er advance presumptuous
claims. Suppose thou hadst wedded a prince of Thrace, the land of
flood and melting snow, where one lord shares his affections with
a host of wives, wouldst thou have slain them? If so, thou wouldst
have set a stigma of insatiate lust on all our sex. A shameful charge!
And yet herein we suffer more than men, though we make a good stand
against it. Ah! my dear lord Hector, for thy sake would I e'en brook
a rival, if ever Cypris led thee astray, and oft in days gone by I
held thy bastard babes to my own breast, to spare thee any cause for
grief. By this course I bound my husband to me by virtue's chains,
whereas thou wilt never so much as let the drops of dew from heaven
above settle on thy lord, in thy jealous fear. Oh! seek not to surpass
thy mother in hankering after men, for 'tis well that all wise children
should avoid the habits of such evil mothers. 

LEADER Mistress mine, be persuaded to come to terms with her, as
far as readily comes within thy power. 

HERMIONE Why this haughty tone, this bandying of words, as if, forsooth,
thou, not I, wert the virtuous wife? 

ANDROMACHE Thy present claims at any rate give thee small title thereto.

HERMIONE Woman, may my bosom never harbour such ideas as thine!

ANDROMACHE Thou art young to speak on such a theme as this.

HERMIONE As for thee, thou dost not speak thereof, but, as thou canst,
dost put it into action against me. 

ANDROMACHE Canst thou not conceal thy pangs of jealousy?

HERMIONE What! doth not every woman put this first of all?

ANDROMACHE Yes, if her experiences are happy; otherwise, there is
no honour in speaking of them. 

HERMIONE Barbarians' laws are not a standard for our city.

ANDROMACHE Alike in Asia and in Hellas infamy attends base actions.

HERMIONE Clever, clever quibbler! yet die thou must and shalt.

ANDROMACHE Dost see the image of Thetis with her eye upon thee?

HERMIONE A bitter foe to thy country because of the death of Achilles.

ANDROMACHE 'Twas not I that slew him, but Helen that mother of thine.

HERMIONE Pray, is it thy intention to probe my wounds yet deeper?

ANDROMACHE Behold, I am dumb, my lips are closed. 

HERMIONE Tell me that which was my only reason for coming hither.

ANDROMACHE No! all I tell thee is, thou hast less wisdom than thou
needest. 

HERMIONE Wilt thou leave these hallowed precincts of the sea-goddess?

ANDROMACHE Yes, if I am not to die for it; otherwise, I never will.

HERMIONE Since that is thy resolve, I shall not even wait my lord's
return. 

ANDROMACHE Nor yet will I, at any rate ere that, surrender to thee.

HERMIONE I will bring fire to bear on thee, and pay no heed to thy
entreaties. 

ANDROMACHE Kindle thy blaze then; the gods will witness it.

HERMIONE And make thy flesh to writhe by cruel wounds. 

ANDROMACHE Begin thy butchery, stain the altar of the goddess with
blood, for she will visit thy iniquity. 

HERMIONE Barbarian creature, hardened in impudence, wilt thou brave
death itself? Still will I find speedy means to make these quit this
seat of thy free will; such a bait have I to lure thee with. But I
will hide my meaning, which the event itself shall soon declare. Yes,
keep thy seat, for I will make thee rise, though molten lead is holding
thee there, before Achilles' son, thy trusted champion, arrive.  (HERMIONE
departs.)  

ANDROMACHE My trusted champion, yes! how strange it is, that though
some god hath devised cures for mortals against the venom of reptiles,
no man ever yet hath discovered aught to cure a woman's venom, which
is far worse than viper's sting or scorching flame; so terrible a
curse are we to mankind. 

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Ah! what sorrows did the son of Zeus and Maia herald, in the day
he came to Ida's glen, guiding that fair young trio of goddesses,
all girded for the fray in bitter rivalry about their beauty, to the
shepherd's fold where dwelt the youthful herdsman all alone by the
hearth of his lonely hut. 

(antistrophe 1)

Soon as they reached the wooded glen, in gushing mountain springs
they bathed their dazzling skin, then sought the son of Priam, comparing
their rival charms in more than rancorous phrase. But Cypris won the
day by her deceitful promises, sweet-sounding words, but fraught with
ruthless overthrow to Phrygia's hapless town and Ilium's towers.

(strophe 2)

Would God his mother had smitten him a cruel death-blow on the head
before he made his home on Ida's slopes, in the hour Cassandra, standing
by the holy bay-tree, cried out, "Slay him, for he will bring most
grievous bane on Priam's town." To every prince she went, to every
elder sued for the babe's destruction. 

(antistrophe 2)

Ah! had they listened, Ilium's daughters neer had felt the yoke of
slavery, and thou, lady, hadst been established in the royal palace;
and Hellas had been freed of all the anguish she suffered during those
ten long years her sons went wandering, spear in hand, around the
walls of Troy; brides had never been left desolate, nor hoary fathers
childless.  (MENELAUS and his retinue enter. He is leading MOLOSSUS
by the hand.)  

MENELAUS Behold I bring thy son with me, whom thou didst steal away
to a neighbour's house without my daughter's knowledge. Thou wert
so sure this image of the goddess would protect thee and those who
hid him, but thou hast not proved clever enough for Menelaus. And
so if thou refuse to leave thy station here, he shall be slain instead
of thee. Wherefore weigh it well: wilt die thyself, or see him slain
for the sin whereof thou art guilty against me and my daughter?

ANDROMACHE O fame, fame! full many a man ere now of no account hast
thou to high estate exalted. Those, indeed, who truly have a fair
repute, I count blest; but those who get it by false pretences, I
will never allow have aught but the accidental appearance of wisdom.
Thou for instance, caitiff that thou art, didst thou ever wrest Troy
from Priam with thy picked troops of Hellenes? thou that hast raised
such a storm, at the word of thy daughter, a mere child, and hast
entered the lists with a poor captive; unworthy I count thee of Troy's
capture, and Troy still more disgraced by thy victory. Those who only
in appearance are men of sense make an outward show, but inwardly
resemble the common herd, save it be in wealth, which is their chiefest
strength. 

Come now, Menelaus, let us carry through this argument. Suppose I
am slain by thy daughter, and she work her will on me, yet can she
never escape the pollution of murder, and public opinion will make
thee too an accomplice in this deed of blood, for thy share in the
business must needs implicate thee. But even supposing I escape death
myself, will ye kill my child? Even then, how will his father brook
the murder of his child? Troy has no such coward's tale to tell of
him; nay, he will follow duty's call; his actions will prove him a
worthy scion of Peleus and Achilles. Thy daughter will be thrust forth
from his house; and what wilt thou say when seeking to betroth her
to another? wilt say her virtue made her leave a worthless lord? Nay,
that will be false. Who then will wed her? wilt thou keep her without
a husband in thy halls, grown grey in widowhood? Unhappy wretch! dost
not see the flood-gates of trouble opening wide for thee? How many
a wrong against a wife wouldst thou prefer thy daughter to have found
to suffering what I now describe? We ought not on trifling grounds
to promote great ills; nor should men, if we women are so deadly a
curse, bring their nature down to our level. No! if, as thy daughter
asserts, I am practising sorcery against her and making her barren,
right willingly will I, without any crouching at altars, submit in
my own person to the penalty that lies in her husband's hands, seeing
that I am no less chargeable with injuring him if I make him childless.
This is my case; but for thee, there is one thing I fear in thy disposition;
it was a quarrel for a woman that really induced thee to destroy poor
Ilium's town. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Thou hast said too much for a woman speaking
to men; that discretion hath shot away its last shaft from thy soul's
quiver. 

MENELAUS Women, these are petty matters, unworthy, as thou sayest,
of my despotic sway, unworthy too of Hellas. Yet mark this well; his
special fancy of the hour is of more moment to a man than Troy's capture.
I then have set myself to help my daughter because I consider her
loss of wife's rights most grave; for whatever else a woman suffers
is second to this; if she loses her husband's love she loses her life
therewith. Now, as it is right Neoptolemus should rule my slaves,
so my friends and I should have control of his; for friends, if they
be really friends, keep nothing to themselves, but have all in common.
So if I wait for the absent instead of making the best arrangement
I can at once of my affairs, I show weakness, not wisdom. Arise then,
leave the goddess's shrine, for by thy death this child escapeth his,
whereas, if thou refuse to die, I will slay him; for one of you twain
must perish. 

ANDROMACHE Ah me! 'tis a bitter lot thou art offering about my life;
whether I take it or not I am equally unfortunate. Attend to me, thou
who for a trifling cause art committing an awful crime. Why art thou
bent on slaying me? What reason hast thou? What city have I betrayed?
Which of thy children was ever slain by me? What house have I fired?
I was forced to be my master's concubine; and spite of that wilt thou
slay me, not him who is to blame, passing by the cause and hurrying
to the inevitable result? Ah me! my sorrows! Woe for my hapless country!
How cruel my fate! Why had I to be a mother too and take upon me a
double load of suffering? Yet why do I mourn the past, and o'er the
present never shed a tear or compute its griefs? I that saw Hector
butchered and dragged behind the chariot, and Ilium, piteous sight!
one sheet of flame, while I was baled away by the hair of my head
to the Argive ships in slavery, and on my arrival in Phthia was given
to Hector's murderer as his mistress. What pleasure then has life
for me? Whither am I to turn my gaze? to the present or the past?
My babe alone was left me, the light of my life, and him these ministers
of death would slay. No! they shall not, if my poor life can save
him; for if he be saved, hope in him lives on, while to me 'twere
shame to refuse to die for my son. Lo! here I leave the altar and
give myself into your hands, to cut or stab, to bind or hang. Ah!
my child, to Hades now thy mother passes to save thy dear life. Yet
if thou escape thy doom, remember me, my sufferings and my death,
and tell thy father how I fared, with fond caress and streaming eye
and arms thrown round his neck. Ah! yes, his children are to every
man as his own soul; and whoso sneers at this through inexperience,
though he suffers less anguish, yet tastes the bitter in his cup of
bliss. 

LEADER Thy tale with pity fills me; for every man alike, stranger
though he be, feels pity for another's distress. Menelaus, 'tis thy
duty to reconcile thy daughter and this captive, giving her a respite
from sorrow. 

MENELAUS Ho! sirrahs, seize this woman  (His attendants swiftly carry
out the order.)  ; hold her fast; for 'tis no welcome story she will
have to hear. It was to make thee leave the holy altar of the goddess
that I held thy child's death before thy eyes, and so induced thee
to give thyself up to me to die. So stands thy case, be well assured;
but as for this child, my daughter shall decide whether she will slay
him or no. Get thee hence into the house, and there learn to bridle
thy insolence in speaking to the free, slave that thou art.

ANDROMACHE Alas! thou hast by treachery beguiled me; I was deceived.

MENELAUS Proclaim it to the world; I do not deny it. 

ANDROMACHE Is this counted cleverness amongst you who dwell by the
Eurotas? 

MENELAUS Yes, and amongst Trojans too, that those who suffer should
retaliate. 

ANDROMACHE Thinkest thou God's hand is shortened, and that thou wilt
not be punished? 

MENELAUS Whene'er that comes, I am ready to bear it. But thy life
will I have. 

ANDROMACHE Wilt likewise slay this tender chick, whom thou hast snatched
from 'neath my wing? 

MENELAUS Not I, but I will give him to my daughter to slay if she
will. 

ANDROMACHE Ah me! why not begin my mourning then for thee, my child?

MENELAUS Of a truth 'tis no very sure hope that he has left.

ANDROMACHE O citizens of Sparta, the bane of all the race of men,
schemers of guile, and masters in lying, devisers of evil plots, with
crooked minds and tortuous methods and ne'er one honest thought, 'tis
wrong that ye should thrive in Hellas. What crime is wanting in your
list? How rife is murder with you! How covetous ye are! One word upon
your lips, another in your heart, this is what men always find with
you. Perdition catch ye! Still death is not so grievous, as thou thinkest,
to me. No! for my life ended in the day that hapless Troy was destroyed
with my lord, that glorious warrior, whose spear oft made a coward
like thee quit the field and seek thy ship. But now against a woman
hast thou displayed the terrors of thy panoply, my would-be murderer.
Strike then! for this my tongue shall never flatter thee or that daughter
of thine. For though thou wert of great account in Sparta, why so
was I in Troy. And if I am now in sorry plight, presume not thou on
this; thou too mayst be so yet.  (MENELAUS and his guards lead ANDROMACHE
out.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Never, oh! never will I commend rival wives or sons of different
mothers, a cause of strife, of bitterness, and grief in every house.
would have a husband content with one wife whose rights he shareth
with no other. 

(antistrophe 1)

Not even in states is dual monarchy better to bear than undivided
rule; it only doubles burdens and causes faction amongst the citizens.
Often too will the Muse sow strife 'twixt rivals in the art of minstrelsy.

(strophe 2)

Again, when strong winds are drifting mariners, the divided counsel
of the wise does not best avail for steering, and their collective
wisdom has less weight than the inferior mind of the single man who
has sole authority; for this is the essence of power alike in house
and state, whene'er men care to find the proper moment. 

(antistrophe 2)

This Spartan, the daughter of the great chief Menelaus, proves this;
for she hath kindled hot fury against a rival, and is bent on slaying
the hapless Trojan maid and her child to further her bitter quarrel.
'Tis a murder gods and laws and kindness all forbid. Ah! lady, retribution
for this deed will yet visit thee. 

But lo! before the house I see those two united souls, condemned to
die. Alas! for thee, poor lady, and for thee, unhappy child, who art
dying on account of thy mother's marriage, though thou hast no share
therein and canst not be blamed by the royal house.  (ANDROMACHE enters,
her arms bound. Her son clings to her. MENELAUS and the guards follow,
intent on accomplishing the murder. The following lines are chanted
responsively.)  

ANDROMACHE Behold me journeying on the downward path, my hands so
tightly bound with cords that they bleed. 

MOLOSSUS O mother, mother mine! I too share thy downward path, nestling
'neath thy wing. 

ANDROMACHE A cruel sacrifice! ye rulers of Phthia! 

MOLOSSUS Come, father! succour those thou lovest. 

ANDROMACHE Rest there, my babe, my darling! on thy mother's bosom,
e'en in death and in the grave. 

MOLOSSUS Ah, woe is me! what will become of me and thee too, mother
mine? 

MENELAUS Away, to the world below! from hostile towers ye came, the
pair of you; two different causes necessitate your deaths; my sentence
takes away thy life, and my daughter Hermione's requires his; for
it would be the height of folly to leave our foemen's sons, when we
might kill them and remove the danger from our house. 

ANDROMACHE O husband mine! I would I had thy strong arm and spear
to aid me, son of Priam. 

MOLOSSUS Ah, woe is me! what spell can I now find to turn death's
stroke aside? 

ANDROMACHE Embrace thy master's knees, my child, and pray to him.

MOLOSSUS Spare, O spare my life, kind master! 

ANDROMACHE Mine eyes are wet with tears, which trickle down my cheeks,
as doth a sunless spring from a smooth rock. Ah me! 

MOLOSSUS What remedy, alas! can I provide me 'gainst my ills?

MENELAUS Why fall at my knees in supplication? hard as the rock and
deaf as the wave am I. My own friends have I helped, but for thee
have no tie of affection; for verily it cost me a great part of my
life to capture Troy and thy mother; so thou shalt reap the fruit
thereof and into Hades' halls descend. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Behold! I see Peleus drawing nigh; with aged
step he hasteth hither.  (PELEUS enters with an attendant.)

PELEUS  (calling out as he comes in sight) What means this? I ask
you and your executioner; why is the palace in an uproar? give a reason;
what mean your lawless machinations? Menelaus, hold thy hand. Seek
not to outrun justice.  (To his attendant)  Forward! faster, faster!
for this matter, methinks, admits of no delay; now if ever would I
fain resume the vigour of my youth. First however will breathe new
life into this captive, being to her as the breeze that blows a ship
before the wind. Tell me, by what right have they pinioned thine arms
and are dragging thee and thy child away? Like a ewe with her lamb
art thou led to the slaughter, while I and thy lord were far away.

ANDROMACHE Behold them that are haling me and my child to death,
e'en as thou seest, aged prince. Why should I tell thee? For not by
one urgent summons alone but by countless messengers have I sent for
thee. No doubt thou knowest by hearsay of the strife in this house
with this man's daughter, and the reason of my ruin. So now they have
torn and are dragging me from the altar of Thetis, the goddess of
thy chiefest adoration and the mother of thy gallant son, without
any proper trial, yea, and without waiting for my absent master; because,
forsooth, they knew my defencelessness and my child's, whom they mean
to slay with me his hapless mother, though he has done no harm. But
to thee, O sire, I make my supplication, prostrate at thy knees, though
my hand cannot touch thy friendly beard; save me, I adjure thee, reverend
sir, or to thy shame and my sorrow shall we be slain. 

PELEUS Loose her bonds, I say, ere some one rue it; untie her folded
hands. 

MENELAUS I forbid it, for besides being a match for thee, I have
a far better right to her. 

PELEUS What! art thou come hither to set my house in order? Art not
content with ruling thy Spartans? 

MENELAUS She is my captive; I took her from Troy. 

PELEUS Aye, but my son's son received her as his prize.

MENELAUS Is not all I have his, and all his mine? 

PELEUS For good, but not evil ends; and surely not for murderous
violence. 

MENELAUS Never shalt thou wrest her from my grasp. 

PELEUS With this good staff I'll stain thy head with blood!

MENELAUS Just touch me and see! Approach one step! 

PELEUS What! shalt thou rank with men? chief of cowards, son of cowards!
What right hast thou to any place 'mongst men? Thou who didst let
Phrygian rob thee of thy wife, leaving thy home without bolt or guard,
as if forsooth the cursed woman thou hadst there was a model of virtue.
No! a Spartan maid could not be chaste, e'en if she would, who leaves
her home and bares her limbs and lets her robe float free, to share
with youths their races and their sports,-customs I cannot away with.
Is it any wonder then that ye fail to educate your women in virtue?
Helen might have asked thee this, seeing that she said goodbye to
thy affection and tripped off with her young gallant to a foreign
land. And yet for her sake thou didst marshal all the hosts of Hellas
and lead them to Ilium, whereas thou shouldst have shown thy loathing
for her by refusing to stir a spear, once thou hadst found her false;
yea, thou shouldst have let her stay there, and even paid a price
to save ever having her back again. But that was not at all the way
thy thoughts were turned; wherefore many a brave life hast thou ended,
and many an aged mother hast thou left childless in her home, and
grey-haired sires of gallant sons hast reft. Of that sad band am I
member, seeing in thee Achilles' murderer like a malignant fiend;
for thou and thou alone hast returned from Troy without a scratch,
bringing back thy splendid weapons in their splendid cases just as
they went. As for me, I ever told that amorous boy to form no alliance
with thee nor take unto his home an evil mother's child; for daughters
bear the marks of their mothers' ill-repute into their new homes.
Wherefore, ye wooers, take heed to this my warning: "Choose the daughter
of a good mother." And more than this, with what wanton insult didst
thou treat thy brother, bidding him sacrifice his daughter in his
simpleness! So fearful wast thou of losing thy worthless wife. Then
after capturing Troy,-for thither too will I accompany thee,-thou
didst not slay that woman, when she was in thy power; but as soon
as thine eyes caught sight of her breast, thy sword was dropped and
thou didst take her kisses, fondling the shameless traitress, too
weak to stem thy hot desire, thou caitiff wretch! Yet spite of all
thou art the man to come and work havoc in my grandson's halls when
he is absent, seeking to slay with all indignity a poor weak woman
and her babe: but that babe shall one day make thee and thy daughter
in thy home rue it, e'en though his birth be trebly base. Yea, for
oft ere now hath seed, sown on barren soil, prevailed o'er rich deep
tilth, and many bastard has proved a better man than children better
born. Take thy daughter hence with thee! Far better is it for mortals
to have a poor honest man either as married kin or friend than a wealthy
knave; but as for thee, thou art a thing of naught. 

LEADER The tongue from trifling causes contrives to breed great strife
'mongst men; wherefore are the wise most careful not to bring about
a quarrel with their friends. 

MENELAUS Why, pray, should one call these old men wise, or those
who once had a reputation in Hellas for being so? when thou, the great
Peleus, son of famous father, kin to me through marriage, employest
language disgraceful to thyself and abusive of me because of a barbarian
woman, though thou shouldst have banished her far beyond the streams
of Nile or Phasis, and ever encouraged me; seeing that she comes from
Asia's continent where fell so many of the sons of Hellas, victims
to the spear; and likewise because she shared in the spilling of thy
son's blood; for Paris who slew thy son Achilles, was brother to Hector,
whose wife she was. And dost thou enter the same abode with her, and
deign to let her share thy board, and suffer her to rear her brood
of vipers in thy house? But I, after all this foresight for thee,
old man, and myself, am to have her torn from my clutches for wishing
to slay her. Yet come now, for 'tis no disgrace to argue; suppose
my daughter has no child, while this woman's sons grow up, wilt thou
set them up to rule the land of Phthia, barbarians born and bred to
lord it over Hellenes? Am I then so void of sense because I hate injustice,
and thou so full of cleverness? Consider yet another point; say thou
hadst given a daughter of thine to some citizen, and hadst then seen
her thus treated, wouldst thou have sat looking on in silence? I trow
not. Dost thou then for a foreigner rail thus at thy nearest friends?
Again, thou mayst say, husband and wife have an equally strong case
if she is wronged by him, and similarly if he find her guilty of indiscretion
in his house; yet while he has ample powers in his own hands, she
depends on parents and friends for her case. Surely then I am right
in helping my own kin! Thou art in thy dotage; for thou wilt do me
more good by speaking of my generalship than by concealing it. Helen's
trouble was not of her own choosing, but sent by heaven, and it proved
a great benefit to Hellas; her sons, till then untried in war or arms,
turned to deeds of prowess, and it is experience which teaches man
all he knows. I showed my wisdom in refraining from slaying my wife,
directly I caught sight of her. Would that thou too hadst ne'er slain
Phocus! All this I bring before thee in pure good-will, not from anger.
But if thou resent it, thy tongue may wag till it ache, yet shall
I gain by prudent forethought. 

LEADER Cease now from idle words, 'twere better far, for fear ye
both alike go wrong. 

PELEUS Alas! what evil customs now prevail in Hellas! Whene'er the
host sets up a trophy o'er the foe, men no more consider this the
work of those who really toiled, but the general gets the credit for
it. Now he was but one among ten thousand others to brandish his spear;
he only did the work of one; but yet he wins more praise than they.
Again, as magistrates in all the grandeur of office they scorn the
common folk, though they are naught themselves; whereas those others
are ten thousand times more wise than they, if daring combine with
judgment. Even so thou and thy brother, exalted by the toilsome efforts
of others, now take your seats in all the swollen pride of Trojan
fame and Trojan generalship. But I will teach thee henceforth to consider
Idaean Paris a foe less terrible than Peleus, unless forthwith thou
pack from this roof, thou and thy childless daughter too, whom my
own true son will hale through his halls by the hair of her head;
for her barrenness will not let her endure fruitfulness in others,
because she has no children herself. Still if misfortune prevents
her bearing offspring, is that a reason why we should be left childless?
Begone! ye varlets, let her go! I will soon see if anyone will hinder
me from loosing her hands.  (to ANDROMACHE)  Arise; these trembling
hands of mine will untie the twisted thongs that bind thee. Out on
thee, coward! is this how thou hast galled her wrists? Didst think
thou wert lashing up a lion or bull? or wert afraid she would snatch
a sword and defend herself against thee? Come, child, nestle to thy
mother's arms; help me loose her bonds; I will yet rear thee in Phthia
to be their bitter foe. If your reputation for prowess and the battles
ye have fought were taken from you Spartans, in all else, be very
sure, you have not your inferiors. 

LEADER The race of old men practises no restraint; and their testiness
makes it hard to check them. 

MENELAUS Thou art only too ready to rush into abuse; while, as for
me, I came to Phthia by constraint and have therefore no intention
either of doing or suffering anything mean. Now must I return home,
for I have no time to waste; for there is a city not so very far from
Sparta, which aforetime was friendly but now is hostile; against her
will I march with my army and bring her into subjection. And when
I have arranged that matter as I wish, I will return; and face to
face with my son-in-law I will give my version of the story and hear
his. And if he punish her, and for the future she exercise self-control,
she shall find me do the like; but if he storm, I'll storm as well;
and every act of mine shall be a reflex of his own. As for thy babbling,
I can bear it easily; for, like to a shadow as thou art, thy voice
is all thou hast, and thou art powerless to do aught but talk.  (MENELAUS
and his retinue withdraw.)  

PELEUS Lead on, my child, safe beneath my sheltering wing, and thou
too, poor lady; for thou art come into a quiet haven after the rude
storm. 

ANDROMACHE Heaven reward thee and all thy race, old sire, for having
saved my child and me his hapless mother! Only beware lest they fall
upon us twain in some lonely spot upon the road and force me from
thee, when they see thy age, my weakness, and this child's tender
years; take heed to this, that we be not a second time made captive,
after escaping now. 

PELEUS Forbear such words, prompted by a woman's cowardice. Go on
thy way; who will lay a finger on you? Methinks he will do it to his
cost, For by heaven's grace I rule o'er many a knight and spearman
bold in my kingdom of Phthia; yea, and myself can still stand straight,
no bent old man as thou dost think; such a fellow as that a mere look
from me will put to flight in spite of my years. For e'en an old man,
be he brave, is worth a host of raw youths; for what avails a fine
figure if a man is coward?  (PELEUS, ANDROMACHE, and MOLOSSUS go out.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Oh! to have never been born, or sprung from noble sires, the heir
to mansions richly stored; for if aught untoward e'er befall, there
is no lack of champions for sons of noble parents, and there is honour
and glory for them when they are proclaimed scions of illustrious
lines; time detracts not from the legacy these good men leave, but
the light of their goodness still burns on when they are dead.

(antistrophe)

Better is it not to win a discreditable victory, than to make justice
miscarry by an invidious exercise of power; for such a victory, though
men think it sweet for the moment, grows barren in time and comes
near being a stain on a house. This is the life I commend, this the
life I set before me as my ideal, to exercise no authority beyond
what is right either in the marriage-chamber or in the state.

(epode)

O aged son of Aeacus! now am I sure that thou wert with the Lapithae,
wielding thy famous spear, when they fought the Centaurs; and on Argo's
deck didst pass the cheerless strait beyond the sea-beat Symplegades
on her voyage famed; and when in days long gone the son of Zeus spread
slaughter round Troy's famous town, thou too didst share his triumphant
return to Europe.  (The NURSE OF HERMIONE enters.)  

NURSE Alas! good friends, what a succession of troubles is to-day
provided us! My mistress Hermione within the house, deserted by her
father and in remorse for her monstrous deed in plotting the death
of Andromache and her child, is bent on dying; for she is afraid her
husband will in requital for this expel her with dishonour from his
house or put her to death, because she tried to slay the innocent.
And the servants that watch her can scarce restrain her efforts to
hang herself, scarce catch the sword and wrest it from her hand. So
bitter is her anguish, and she hath recognized the villainy of her
former deeds. As for me, friends, I am weary of keeping my mistress
from the fatal noose; do ye go in and try to save her life; for if
strangers come, they prove more persuasive than the friends of every
day. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Ah yes! I hear an outcry in the house amongst
the servants, confirming the news thou hast brought. Poor sufferer!
she seems about to show lively grief for her grave crimes; for she
has escaped her servants' hands and is rushing from the house, eager
to end her life.  (HERMIONE enters, in agitation. She is carrying
a sword which the NURSE wrests from her.)  

HERMIONE  (chanting) Woe, woe is me! I will rend my hair and tear
cruel furrows in my cheeks. 

NURSE My child, what wilt thou do? Wilt thou disfigure thyself?

HERMIONE  (chanting) Ah me! ah me! Begone, thou fine-spun veil! float
from my head away! 

NURSE Daughter, cover up thy bosom, fasten thy robe. 

HERMIONE  (chanting) Why should I cover it? My crimes against my
lord are manifest and clear, they cannot be hidden. 

NURSE Art so grieved at having devised thy rival's death?

HERMIONE  (chanting) Yea, I deeply mourn my fatal deeds of daring;
alas! I am now accursed in all men's eyes! 

NURSE Thy husband will pardon thee this error. 

HERMIONE  (chanting) Oh! why didst thou hunt me to snatch away my
sword? Give, oh! give it back, dear nurse, that I may thrust it through
my heart Why dost thou prevent me hanging myself? 

NURSE What! was I to let thy madness lead thee on to death?

HERMIONE  (chanting) Ah me, my destiny! Where can I find some friendly
fire? To what rocky height can I climb above the sea or 'mid some
wooded mountain glen, there to die and trouble but the dead?

NURSE Why vex thyself thus? on all of us sooner or later heaven's
visitation comes. 

HERMIONE  (chanting) Thou hast left me, O my father, left me like
a stranded bark, all alone, without an oar. My lord will surely slay
me; no home is mine henceforth beneath my husband's roof. What god
is there to whose statue I can as a suppliant haste? or shall I throw
myself in slavish wise at slavish knees? Would I could speed away
from Phthia's land on bird's dark pinion, or like that pine-built
ship, the first that ever sailed betwixt the rocks Cyanean!

NURSE My child, I can as little praise thy previous sinful excesses,
committed against the Trojan captive, as thy present exaggerated terror.
Thy husband will never listen to a barbarian's weak pleading and reject
his marriage with thee for this. For thou wast no captive from Troy
whom he wedded, but the daughter of a gallant sire, with a rich dower,
from a city too of no mean prosperity. Nor will thy father forsake
thee, as thou dreadest, and allow thee to be cast out from this house.
Nay, enter now, nor show thyself before the palace, lest the sight
of thee there bring reproach upon thee, my daughter.  (The NURSE departs
as ORESTES and his attendants enter.)  

LEADER Lo! a stranger of foreign appearance from some other land
comes hurrying towards us. 

ORESTES Women of this foreign land! is this the home, the palace
of Achilles' son? 

LEADER Thou hast it; but who art thou to ask such a question?

ORESTES The son of Agamemnon and Clytemnestra, by name Orestes, on
ply way to the oracle of Zeus at Dodona. But now that I am come to
Phthia, I am resolved to inquire about my kinswoman, Hermione of Sparta;
is she alive and well? for though she dwells in a land far from my
own, I love her none the less. 

HERMIONE Son of Agamemnon, thy appearing is as a haven from the storm
to sailors; by thy knees I pray, have pity on me in my distress, on
me of whose fortunes thou art inquiring. About thy knees I twine my
arms with all the force of sacred fillets. 

ORESTES Ha! what is this? Am I mistaken or do I really see before
me the queen of this palace, the daughter of Menelaus? 

HERMIONE The same, that only child whom Helen, daughter of Tyndareus,
bore my father in his halls; never doubt that. 

ORESTES O saviour Phoebus, grant us respite from our woe! But what
is the matter? art thou afflicted by gods or men? 

HERMIONE Partly by myself, partly by the man who wedded me, and partly
by some god. On every side I see ruin. 

ORESTES Why, what misfortune could happen to a woman as yet childless,
unless her honour is concerned? 

HERMIONE My very ill! Thou hast hit my case exactly. 

ORESTES On whom has thy husband set his affections in thy stead?

HERMIONE On his captive, Hector's wife. 

ORESTES An evil case indeed, for a man to have two wives!

HERMIONE 'Tis even thus. So I resented it. 

ORESTES Didst thou with woman's craft devise a plot against thy rival?

HERMIONE Yes, to slay her and her bastard child. 

ORESTES And didst thou slay them, or did something happen to rescue
them from thee? 

HERMIONE It was old Peleus, who showed regard to the weaker side.

ORESTES Hadst thou any accomplice in this attempted murder?

HERMIONE My father came from Sparta for this very purpose.

ORESTES And was he after all defeated by that old man's prowess?

HERMIONE Oh no! but by shame; and he hath gone and left me all alone.

ORESTES I understand; thou art afraid of thy husband for what thou
hast done. 

HERMIONE Thou hast guessed it; for he will have a right to slay me.
What can say for myself? Yet I beseech thee by Zeus the god of our
family, send me to a land as far as possible from this, or to my father's
house; for these very walls seem to cry out "Begone!" and all the
land of Phthia hates me. But if my lord return ere that from the oracle
of Phoebus, he will put me to death on a shameful charge, or enslave
me to his mistress, whom ruled before. Maybe some one will say, "How
was it thou didst go thus astray?" I was ruined by evil women who
came to me and puffed me up with words like these: "Wait! wilt thou
suffer that vile captive, a mere bondmaid, to dwell within thy house
and share thy wedded rights? By Heaven's queen! if it were my house
she should not live to reap my marriage-harvest!" And I listened to
the words of these Sirens, the cunning, knavish, subtle praters, and
was filled with silly thoughts. What need had I to care about my lord?
I had all I wanted, wealth in plenty, a house in which I was mistress,
and as for children, mine would be born in wedlock, while hers would
be bastards, half-slaves to mine. Oh! never, never,-this truth will
I repeat,-should men of sense, who have wives, allow women-folk to
visit them in their homes, for they teach them evil; one, to gain
some private end, helps to corrupt their honour; another, having made
a slip herself, wants a companion in misfortune, while many are wantons;
and hence it is men's houses are tainted. Wherefore keep strict guard
upon the portals of your houses with bolts and bars; for these visits
of strange women lead to no good result, but a world of ill.

LEADER Thou hast given thy tongue too free a rein regarding thy own
sex. I can pardon thee in this case, but still women ought to smooth
over their sisters' weaknesses. 

ORESTES 'Twas sage counsel he gave who taught men to hear the arguments
on both sides. I, for instance, though aware of the confusion in this
house, the quarrel between thee and Hector's wife, waited awhile and
watched to see whether thou wouldst stay here or from fear of that
captive art minded to quit these halls. Now it was not so much regard
for thy message that brought me thither, as the intention of carrying
thee away from this house, if, as now, thou shouldst grant me a chance
of saying so. For thou wert mine formerly, but art now living with
thy present husband through thy father's baseness; since he, before
invading Troy's domains, betrothed thee to me, and then afterwards
promised thee to thy present lord, provided he captured the city of
Troy. 

So, as soon as Achilles' son returned hither, I forgave thy father,
but entreated the bridegroom to forego his marriage with thee, telling
him all I had endured and my present misfortune; I might get a wife,
I said, from amongst friends, but outside their circle 'twas no easy
task for one exiled like myself from home. Thereat he grew abusive,
taunting me with my mother's murder and those blood-boltered fiends.
And I was humbled by the fortunes of my house, and though 'tis true,
I grieved, yet did I bear my sorrow, and reluctantly departed, robbed
of thy promised hand. Now therefore, since thou findest thy fortune
so abruptly changed and art fallen thus on evil days and hast no help,
I will take thee hence and place thee in thy father's hands. For kinship
hath strong claims, and in adversity there is naught better than a
kinsman's kindly aid. 

HERMIONE As for my marriage, my father must look to it; 'tis not
for me to decide. Yes, take me hence as soon as may be, lest my husband
come back to his house before I am gone, or Peleus hear that I am
deserting his son's abode and pursue me with his swift steeds.

ORESTES Rest easy about the old man's power; and, as for Achilles'
son with all his insolence to me, never fear him; such a crafty net
this hand hath woven and set for his death with knots that none can
loose; whereof I will not speak before the time, but, when my plot
begins to work, Delphi's rock will witness it. If but my allies in
the Pythian land abide by their oaths, this same murderer of his mother
will show that no one else shall marry thee my rightful bride. To
his cost will he demand satisfaction of King Phoebus for his father's
blood; nor shall his repentance avail him though he is now submitting
to the god. No! he shall perish miserably by Apollo's hand and my
false accusations; so shall he find out my enmity. For the deity upsets
the fortune of them that hate him, and suffers them not to be high-minded.
(ORESTES and HERMIONE depart.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

O Phoebus! who didst fence the hill of Ilium with a fair coronal
of towers, and thou, ocean-god! coursing o'er the main with thy dark
steeds, wherefore did ye hand over in dishonour your own handiwork
to the war-god, master of the spear, abandoning Troy to wretchedness?

(antistrophe 1)

Many a well-horsed car ye yoked on the banks of Simois, and many
a bloody tournament did ye ordain with never a prize to win; and Ilium's
princes are dead and gone; no longer in Troy is seen the blaze of
fire on altars of the gods with the smoke of incense. 

(strophe 2)

The son of Atreus is no more, slain by the hand of his wife, and
she herself hath paid the debt of blood by death, and from her children's
hands received her doom. The god's own bidding from his oracle was
levelled against her, in the day that Agamemnon's son set forth from
Argos and visited his shrine; so he slew her, aye, spilt his own mother's
blood. O Phoebus, O thou power divine, how can I believe the story?

(antistrophe 2)

Anon wherever Hellenes gather, was heard the voice of lamentation,
mothers weeping o'er their children's fate, as they left their homes
to mate with strangers. Ah! thou art not the only one, nor thy dear
ones either, on whom the cloud of grief hath fallen. Hellas had to
bear the visitation, and thence the scourge crossed to Phrygia's fruitful
fields, raining the bloody drops the death-god loves.  (PELEUS enters
in haste.)  

PELEUS Ye dames of Phthia, answer my questions. I heard a vague rumour
that the daughter of Menelaus had left these halls and fled; so now
I am come in hot haste to learn if this be true; for it is the duty
of those who are at home to labour in the interests of their absent
friends. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Thou hast heard aright, O Peleus; ill would
it become me to hide the evil case in which I now find myself; our
queen has fled and left these halls. 

PELEUS What did she fear? explain that to me. 

LEADER She was afraid her lord would cast her out. 

PELEUS In return for plotting his child's death? surely not?

LEADER Yea, and she was afraid of yon captive. 

PELEUS With whom did she leave the house? with her father?

LEADER The son of Agamemnon came and took her hence. 

PELEUS What view hath he to further thereby? Will he marry her?

LEADER Yes, and he is plotting thy grandson's death. 

PELEUS From an ambuscade, or meeting him fairly face to face?

LEADER In the holy place of Loxias, leagued with Delphians.

PELEUS God help us. This is a present danger. Hasten one of you with
all speed to the Pythian altar and tell our friends there what has
happened here, ere Achilles' son be slain by his enemies.  (A MESSENGER
enters.)  

MESSENGER Woe worth the day! what evil tidings have I brought for
thee, old sire, and for all who love my master! woe is me!

PELEUS Alas! my prophetic soul hath a presentiment. 

MESSENGER Aged Peleus, hearken! Thy grandson is no more; so grievously
is he smitten by the men of Delphi and the stranger from Mycenae.

LEADER Ah! what wilt thou do, old man? Fall not; uplift thyself.

PELEUS I am a thing of naught; death is come upon me. My voice is
choked, my limbs droop beneath me. 

MESSENGER Hearken; if thou art eager also to avenge thy friends,
lift up thyself and hear what happened. 

PELEUS Ah, destiny! how tightly hast thou caught me in thy toils,
a poor old man at life's extremest verge! But tell me how he was taken
from me, my one son's only child; unwelcome as such news is, I fain
would hear it. 

MESSENGER As soon as we reached the famous soil of Phoebus, for three
whole days were we feasting our eyes with the sight. And this, it
seems, caused suspicion; for the folk, who dwell near the god's shrine,
began to collect in groups, while Agamemnon's son, going to and fro
through the town, would whisper in each man's ear malignant hints:
"Do ye see yon fellow, going in and out of the god's treasure-chambers,
which are full of the gold stored there by all mankind? He is come
hither a second time on the same mission as before, eager to sack
the temple of Phoebus." Thereon there ran an angry murmur through
the city, and the magistrates flocked to their council-chamber, while
those, who have charge of the god's treasures, had a guard privately
placed amongst the colonnades. But we, knowing naught as yet of this,
took sheep fed in the pastures of Parnassus, and went our way and
stationed ourselves at the altars with vouchers and Pythian seers.
And one said: "What prayer, young warrior, wouldst thou have us offer
to the god? Wherefore art thou come?" And he answered: "I wish to
make atonement to Phoebus for my past transgression; for once I claimed
from him satisfaction for my father's blood." Thereupon the rumour,
spread by Orestes, proved to have great weight, suggesting that my
master was lying and had come on a shameful errand. But he crosses
the threshold of the temple to pray to Phoebus before his oracle,
and was busy with his burnt-offering; when a body of men armed with
swords set themselves in ambush against him in the cover of the bay-trees,
and Clytemnestra's son, that had contrived the whole plot was one
of them. There stood the young man praying to the god in sight of
all, when lo! with their sharp swords they stabbed Achilles' unprotected
son from behind. But he stepped back, for it was not a mortal wound
he had received, and drew his sword, and snatching armour from the
pegs where it hung on a pillar, took his stand upon the altar-steps,
the picture of a warrior grim; then cried he to the sons of Delphi,
and asked them: "Why seek to slay me when I am come on a holy mission?
What cause is there why I should die? But of all that throng of bystanders,
no man answered him a word, but they set to hurling stones. Then he,
though bruised and battered by the showers of missiles from all sides,
covered himself behind his mail and tried to ward off the attack,
holding his shield first here, then there, at arm's length, but all
of no avail; for a storm of darts, arrows and javelins, hurtling spits
with double points, and butchers' knives for slaying steers, came
flying at his feet; and terrible was the war-dance thou hadst then
seen thy grandson dance to avoid their marksmanship. At last, when
they were hemming him in on all sides, allowing him no breathing space,
he left the shelter of the altar, the hearth where victims are placed,
and with one bound was on them as on the Trojans of yore; and they
turned and fled like doves when they see the hawk. Many fell in the
confusion: some wounded, and others trodden down by one another along
the narrow passages; and in that hushed holy house uprose unholy din
and echoed back from the rocks. Calm and still my master stood there
in his gleaming harness like a flash of light, till from the inmost
shrine there came a voice of thrilling horror, stirring the crowd
to make a stand. Then fell Achilles' son, smitten through the flank
by some Delphian's biting blade, some fellow that slew him with a
host to help; and as he fell, there was not one that did not stab
him, or cast a rock and batter his corpse. So his whole body, once
so fair, was marred with savage wounds. At last they cast the lifeless
clay, Iying near the altar, forth from the fragrant fane. And we gathered
up his remains forthwith and are bringing them to thee, old prince,
to mourn and weep and honour with a deep-dug tomb. 

This is how that prince who vouchsafeth oracles to others, that judge
of what is right for all the world, hath revenged himself on Achilles'
son, remembering his ancient quarrel as a wicked man would. How then
can he be wise?  (The MESSENGER withdraws as the body of Neoptolemus
is carried in on a bier. The following lines between PELEUS and the
CHORUS are chanted responsively.)  

CHORUS Lo! e'en now our prince is being carried on a bier from Delphi's
land unto his home. Woe for him and his sad fate, and woe for thee,
old sire! for this is not the welcome thou wouldst give Achilles'
son, the lion's whelp; thyself too by this sad mischance dost share
his evil lot. 

PELEUS Ah! woe is me! here is a sad sight for me to see and take
unto my halls! Ah me! ah me! I am undone, thou city of Thessaly! My
line now ends; I have no children left me in my home. Oh! the sorrows
seem born to endure! What friend can I look to for relief? Ah, dear
lips, and cheeks, and hands! Would thy destiny had slain the 'neath
Ilium's walls beside the banks of Simois! 

CHORUS Had he so died, my aged lord, he had won him honour thereby,
and thine had been the happier lot. 

PELEUS O marriage, marriage, woe to thee! thou bane of my home, thou
destroyer of my city! Ah my child, my boy, would that the honour of
wedding thee, fraught with evil as it was to my children and house,
had not thrown o'er thee, my son, Hermione's deadly net! that the
thunderbolt had slain her sooner! and that thou, rash mortal, hadst
never charged the great god Phoebus with aiming that murderous shaft
that spilt thy hero-father's blood! 

CHORUS Woe! woe! alas! With due observance of funeral rites will
I begin the mourning for my dead master. 

PELEUS Alack and well-a-day! I take up the tearful dirge, ah me!
old and wretched as I am. 

CHORUS 'Tis Heaven's decree; God willed this heavy stroke.

PELEUS O darling child, thou hast left me all alone in my halls,
old and childless by thy loss. 

CHORUS Thou shouldst have died, old sire, before thy children.

PELEUS Shall I not tear my hair, and smite upon my head with grievous
blows? O city! of both my children hath Phoebus robbed me.

CHORUS What evils thou hast suffered, what sorrows thou hast seen,
thou poor old man! what shall be thy life hereafter? 

PELEUS Childless, desolate, with no limit to my grief, I must drain
the cup of woe, until I die. 

CHORUS 'Twas all in vain the gods wished thee joy on thy wedding
day. 

PELEUS All my hopes have flown away, fallen short of my high boasts.

CHORUS A lonely dweller in a lonely home art thou. 

PELEUS I have no city any longer; there! on the ground my sceptre
do cast; and thou, daughter of Nereus, 'neath thy dim grotto, shalt
see me grovelling in the dust, a ruined king. 

CHORUS Look, look!  (A dim form of divine appearance is seen hovering
mid air.)  What is that moving? what influence divine am I conscious
of? Look, maidens, mark it well; see, yonder is some deity, wafted
through the lustrous air and alighting on the plains of Phthia, home
of steeds. 

THETIS  (from above) O Peleus! because of my wedded days with thee
now long agone, I Thetis am come from the halls of Nereus. And first
I counsel thee not to grieve to excess in thy present distress, for
I too who need ne'er have borne children to my sorrow, have lost the
child of our love, Achilles swift of foot, foremost of the sons of
Hellas. Next will I declare why I am come, and do thou give ear. Carry
yonder corpse, Achilles' son, to the Pythian altar and there bury
it, a reproach to Delphi, that his tomb may proclaim the violent death
he met at the hand of Orestes. And for his captive wife Andromache,-she
must dwell in the Molossian land, united in honourable wedlock with
Helenus, and with her this babe, the sole survivor as he is of all
the line of Aeacus, for from him a succession of prosperous kings
of Molossia is to go on unbroken; for the race that springs from thee
and me, my aged lord, must not thus be brought to naught; no! nor
Troy's line either; for her fate too is cared for by the gods, albeit
her fall was due to the eager wish of Pallas. Thee too, that thou
mayst know the saving grace of wedding me, will I, a goddess born
and daughter of a god, release from all the ills that flesh is heir
to and make a deity to know not death nor decay. From henceforth in
the halls of Nereus shalt thou dwell with me, god and goddess together;
thence shalt thou rise dry-shod from out the main and see Achilles,
our dear son, settled in his island-home by the strand of Leuce, that
is girdled by the Euxine sea. But get thee to Delphi's god-built town,
carrying this corpse with thee, and, after thou hast buried him, return
and settle in the cave which time hath hollowed in the Sepian rock
and there abide, till from the sea I come with choir of fifty Nereids
to be thy escort thence; for fate's decree thou must fulfil; such
is the pleasure of Zeus. Cease then to mourn the dead; this is the
lot which heaven assigns to all, and all must pay their debt to death.

PELEUS Great queen, my honoured wife, from Nereus sprung, all hail!
thou art acting herein as befits thyself and thy children. So I will
stay my grief at thy bidding, goddess, and, when I have buried the
dead, will seek the glens of Pelion, even the place where I took thy
beauteous form to my embrace. Surely after this every prudent man
will seek to marry a wife of noble stock and give his daughter to
a husband good and true, never setting his heart on a worthless woman,
not even though she bring a sumptuous dowry to his house. So would
men ne'er suffer ill at heaven's hand.  (THETIS vanishes.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Many are the shapes of Heaven's denizens, and
many a thing they bring to pass contrary to our expectation; that
which we thought would be is not accomplished, while for the unexpected
God finds out a way. E'en such hath been the issue of this matter. 

THEEND

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the Palace of Pentheus at Thebes. Enter DIONYSUS.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

DIONYSUS Lo! I am come to this land of Thebes, Dionysus' the son
of Zeus, of whom on a day Semele, the daughter of Cadmus, was delivered
by a flash of lightning. I have put off the god and taken human shape,
and so present myself at Dirce's springs and the waters of Ismenus.
Yonder I see my mother's monument where the bolt slew her nigh her
house, and there are the ruins of her home smouldering with the heavenly
flame that blazeth still-Hera's deathless outrage on my mother. To
Cadmus all praise I offer, because he keeps this spot hallowed, his
daughter's precinct, which my own hands have shaded round about with
the vine's clustering foliage. 

Lydia's glebes, where gold abounds, and Phrygia have I left behind;
o'er Persia's sun-baked plains, by Bactria's walled towns and Media's
wintry clime have I advanced through Arabia, land of promise; and
Asia's length and breadth, outstretched along the brackish sea, with
many a fair walled town, peopled with mingled race of Hellenes and
barbarians; and this is the first city in Hellas I have reached. There
too have I ordained dances and established my rites, that I might
manifest my godhead to men; but Thebes is the first city in the land
of Hellas that I have made ring with shouts of joy, girt in a fawn-skin,
with a thyrsus, my ivy-bound spear, in my hand; since my mother's
sisters, who least of all should have done it, denied that Dionysus
was the son of Zeus, saying that Semele, when she became a mother
by some mortal lover, tried to foist her sin on Zeus-a clever ruse
of Cadmus, which, they boldly asserted, caused Zeus to slay her for
the falsehood about the marriage. Wherefore these are they whom I
have driven frenzied from their homes, and they are dwelling on the
hills with mind distraught; and I have forced them to assume the dress
worn in my orgies, and all the women-folk of Cadmus' stock have I
driven raving from their homes, one and all alike; and there they
sit upon the roofless rocks beneath the green pine-trees, mingling
amongst the sons of Thebes. For this city must learn, however loth,
seeing that it is not initiated in my Bacchic rites, and I must take
up my mother's defence, by showing to mortals that the child she bore
to Zeus is a deity. Now Cadmus gave his sceptre and its privileges
to Pentheus, his daughter's child, who wages war 'gainst my divinity,
thrusting me away from his drink-offerings, and making no mention
of me in his prayers. Therefore will I prove to him and all the race
of Cadmus that I am a god. And when I have set all in order here,
I will pass hence to a fresh country, manifesting myself; but if the
city of Thebes in fury takes up arms and seeks to drive my votaries
from the mountain, I will meet them at the head of my frantic rout.
This is why I have assumed a mortal form, and put off my godhead to
take man's nature. 

O ye who left Tmolus, the bulwark of Lydia, ye women, my revel rout!
whom I brought from your foreign homes to be ever by my side and bear
me company, uplift the cymbals native to your Phrygian home, that
were by me and the great mother Rhea first devised, and march around
the royal halls of Pentheus smiting them, that the city of Cadmus
may see you; while I will seek Cithaeron's glens, there with my Bacchanals
to join the dance.  (Exit DIONYSUS., Enter CHORUS.)  

CHORUS From Asia o'er the holy ridge of Tmolus hasten to a pleasant
task, a toil that brings no weariness, for Bromius' sake, in honour
of the Bacchic god. Who loiters in the road? who lingers 'neath the
roof? Avaunt! I say, and let every lip be hushed in solemn silence;
for I will raise a hymn to Dionysus, as custom aye ordains. O happy
he! who to his joy is initiated in heavenly mysteries and leads a
holy life, joining heart and soul in Bacchic revelry upon the hills,
purified from every sin; observing the rites of Cybele, the mighty
mother, and brandishing the thyrsus, with ivy-wreathed head, he worships
Dionysus. Go forth, go forth, ye Bacchanals, bring home the Bromian
god Dionysus, child of a god, from the mountains of Phrygia to the
spacious streets of Hellas, bring home the Bromian god! whom on a
day his mother in her sore travail brought forth untimely, yielding
up her life beneath the lightning stroke of Zeus' winged bolt; but
forthwith Zeus, the son of Cronos, found for him another womb wherein
to rest, for he hid him in his thigh and fastened it with golden pins
to conceal him from Hera. And when the Fates had fully formed the
horned god, he brought him forth and crowned him with a coronal of
snakes, whence it is the thyrsus-bearing Maenads hunt the snake to
twine about their hair. O Thebes, nurse of Semele! crown thyself with
ivy; burst forth, burst forth with blossoms fair of green convolvulus,
and with the boughs of oak and pine join in the Bacchic revelry; dor;-thy
coat of dappled fawn-skin, decking it with tufts of silvered hair;
with reverent hand the sportive wand now wield. Anon shall the whole
land be dancing, when Bromius leads his revellers to the hills, to
the hills away! where wait him groups of maidens from loom and shuttle
roused in frantic haste by Dionysus. O hidden cave of the Curetes!
O hallowed haunts in Crete, that saw Zeus born, where Corybantes with
crested helms devised for me in their grotto the rounded timbrel of
ox-hide, mingling Bacchic minstrelsy with the shrill sweet accents
of the Phrygian flute, a gift bestowed by them on mother Rhea, to
add its crash of music to the Bacchantes' shouts of joy; but frantic
satyrs won it from the mother-goddess for their own, and added it
to their dances in festivals, which gladden the heart of Dionysus,
each third recurrent year. Oh! happy that votary, when from the hurrying
revel-rout he sinks to earth, in his holy robe of fawnskin, chasing
the goat to drink its blood, a banquet sweet of flesh uncooked, as
he hastes to Phrygia's or to Libya's hills; while in the van the Bromian
god exults with cries of Evoe. With milk and wine and streams of luscious
honey flows the earth, and Syrian incense smokes. While the Bacchante
holding in his hand a blazing torch of pine uplifted on his wand waves
it, as he speeds along, rousing wandering votaries, and as he waves
it cries aloud with wanton tresses tossing in the breeze; and thus
to crown the revelry, he raises loud his voice, "On, on, ye Bacchanals,
pride of Tmolus with its rills of gold I to the sound of the booming
drum, chanting in joyous strains the praises of your joyous god with
Phrygian accents lifted high, what time the holy lute with sweet complaining
note invites you to your hallowed sport, according well with feet
that hurry wildly to the hills; like a colt that gambols at its mother's
side in the pasture, with gladsome heart each Bacchante bounds along."
(Enter TEIRESIAS.)  

TEIRESIAS What loiterer at the gates will call Cadmus from the house,
Agenor's son, who left the city of Sidon and founded here the town
of Thebes? Go one of you, announce to him that Teiresias is seeking
him; he knows himself the reason of my coming and the compact I and
he have made in our old age to bind the thyrsus with leaves and don
the fawnskin, crowning our heads the while with ivy-sprays.  (Enter
CADMUS.)  

CADMUS Best of friends! I was in the house when I heard thy voice,
wise as its owner. I come prepared, dressed in the livery of the god.
For 'tis but right I should magnify with all my might my own daughter's
son, Dionysus, who hath shown his godhead unto men. Where are we to
join the dance? where plant the foot and shake the hoary head? Do
thou, Teiresias, be my guide, age leading age, for thou art wise.
Never shall I weary, night or day, of beating the earth with my thyrsus.
What joy to forget our years? 

TEIRESIAS Why, then thou art as I am. For I too am young again, and
will essay the dance. 

CADMUS We will drive then in our chariot to the hill. 

TEIRESIAS Nay, thus would the god not have an equal honour paid.

CADMUS Well, I will lead thee, age leading age. 

TEIRESIAS The god will guide us both thither without toil.

CADMUS Shall we alone of all the city dance in Bacchus' honour?

TEIRESIAS Yea, for we alone are wise, the rest are mad.

CADMUS We stay too long; come, take my hand. 

TEIRESIAS There link thy hand in my firm grip. 

CADMUS Mortal that I am, I scorn not the gods. 

TEIRESIAS No subtleties do I indulge about the powers of heaven.
The faith we inherited from our fathers, old as time itself, no reasoning
shall cast down; no! though it were the subtlest invention of wits
refined. Maybe some one will say, I have no respect for my grey hair
in going to dance with ivy round my head; not so, for the god did
not define whether old or young should dance, but from all alike he
claims a universal homage, and scorns nice calculations in his worship.

CADMUS Teiresias, since thou art blind, I must prompt thee what to
say. Pentheus is coming hither to the house in haste, Echion's son,
to whom I resign the government. How scared he looks I what strange
tidings will he tell?  (Enter PENTHEUS.)  

PENTHEUS I had left my kingdom for awhile, when tidings of strange
mischief in this city reached me; I hear that our women-folk have
left their homes on pretence of Bacchic rites, and on the wooded hills
rush wildly to and fro, honouring in the dance this new god Dionysus,
whoe'er he is; and in the midst of each revel-rout the brimming wine-bowl
stands, and one by one they steal away to lonely spots to gratify
their lust, pretending forsooth that they are Maenads bent on sacrifice,
though it is Aphrodite they are placing before the Bacchic god. As
many as I caught, my gaolers are keeping safe in the public prison
fast bound; and all who are gone forth, will I chase from the hills,
Ino and Agave too who bore me to Echion, and Actaeon's mother Autonoe.
In fetters of iron will I bind them and soon put an end to these outrageous
Bacchic rites. They say there came a stranger hither, a trickster
and a sorcerer, from Lydia's land, with golden hair and perfumed locks,
the flush of wine upon his face, and in his eyes each grace that Aphrodite
gives; by day and night he lingers in our maidens' company on the
plea of teaching Bacchic mysteries. Once let me catch him within these
walls, and I will put an end to his thyrsus-beating and his waving
of his tresses, for I will cut his head from his body. This is the
fellow who says that Dionysus is a god, says that he was once stitched
up in the thigh of Zeus-that child who with his mother was blasted
by the lightning flash, because the woman falsely said her marriage
was with Zeus. Is not this enough to deserve the awful penalty of
hanging, this stranger's wanton insolence, whoe'er he be?

But lo! another marvel. I see Teiresias, our diviner, dressed in dappled
fawn-skins, and my mother's father too, wildly waving the Bacchic
wand; droll sight enough! Father, it grieves me to see you two old
men so void of sense. Oh! shake that ivy from thee! Let fall the thyrsus
from thy hand, my mother's sire! Was it thou, Teiresias, urged him
on to this? Art bent on introducing this fellow as another new deity
amongst men, that thou mayst then observe the fowls of the air and
make a gain from fiery divination? Were it not that thy grey hairs
protected thee, thou shouldst sit in chains amid the Bacchanals, for
introducing knavish mysteries; for where the gladsome grape is found
at women's feasts, I deny that their rites have any longer good results.

CHORUS What impiety! Hast thou no reverence, sir stranger, for the
gods or for Cadmus who sowed the crop of earth-born warriors? Son
of Echion as thou art, thou dost shame thy birth. 

TEIRESIAS Whenso a man of wisdom finds a good topic for argument,
it is no difficult matter to speak well; but thou, though possessing
a glib tongue as if endowed with sense, art yet devoid thereof in
all thou sayest. A headstrong man, if he have influence and a capacity
for speaking, makes a bad citizen because he lacks sense. This new
deity, whom thou deridest, will rise to power I cannot say how great,
throughout Hellas. Two things there are, young prince, that hold first
rank among men, the goddess Demeter, that is, the earth, calf her
which name thou please; she it is that feedeth men with solid food;
and as her counterpart came this god, the son of Semele, who discovered
the juice of the grape and introduced it to mankind, stilling thereby
each grief that mortals suffer from, soon as e'er they are filled
with the juice of the vine; and sleep also he giveth, sleep that brings
forgetfulness of daily ills, the sovereign charm for all our woe.
God though he is, he serves all other gods for libations, so that
through him mankind is blest. He it is whom thou dost mock, because
he was sewn up in the thigh of Zeus. But I will show thee this fair
mystery. When Zeus had snatched him from the lightning's blaze, and
to Olympus borne the tender babe, Hera would have cast him forth from
heaven, but Zeus, as such a god well might, devised a counterplot.
He broke off a fragment of the ether which surrounds the world, and
made thereof a hostage against Hera's bitterness, while he gave out
Dionysus into other hands; hence, in time, men said that he was reared
in the thigh of Zeus, having changed the word and invented a legend,
because the god was once a hostage to the goddess Hera. This god too
hath prophetic power, for there is no small prophecy inspired by Bacchic
frenzy; for whenever the god in his full might enters the human frame,
he makes his frantic votaries foretell the future. Likewise he hath
some share in Ares' rights; for oft, or ever a weapon is touched,
a panic seizes an army when it is marshalled in array; and this too
is a frenzy sent by Dionysus. Yet shalt thou behold him e'en on Delphi's
rocks leaping o'er the cloven height, torch in hand, waving and brandishing
the branch by Bacchus loved, yea, and through the length and breadth
of Hellas. Hearken to me, Pentheus; never boast that might alone doth
sway the world, nor if thou think so, unsound as thy opinion is, credit
thyself with any wisdom; but receive the god into thy realm, pour
out libations, join the revel rout, and crown thy head. It is not
Dionysus that will force chastity on women in their love; but this
is what we should consider, whether chastity is part of their nature
for good and all; for if it is, no really modest maid will ever fall
'mid Bacchic mysteries. Mark this: thou thyself art glad when thousands
throng thy gates, and citizens extol the name of Pentheus; he too,
I trow, delights in being honoured. Wherefore I and Cadmus, whom thou
jeerest so, will wreath our brows with ivy and join the dance; pair
of grey beards though we be, still must we take part therein; never
will I for any words of thine fight against heaven. Most grievous
is thy madness, nor canst thou find a charm to cure thee, albeit charms
have caused thy malady. 

CHORUS Old sir, thy words do not discredit Phoebus, and thou art
wise in honouring Bromius, potent deity. 

CADMUS My son, Teiresias hath given thee sound advice; dwell with
us, but o'erstep not the threshold of custom; for now thou art soaring
aloft, and thy wisdom is no wisdom. E'en though he be no god, as thou
assertest, still say he is; be guilty of a splendid fraud, declaring
him the son of Semele, that she may be thought the mother of a god,
and we and all our race gain honour. Dost thou mark the awful fate
of Actaeon? whom savage hounds of his own rearing rent in pieces in
the meadows, because he boasted himself a better hunter than Artemis.
Lest thy fate be the same, come let me crown thy head with ivy; join
us in rendering homage to the god. 

PENTHEUS Touch me not away to thy Bacchic rites thyself! never try
to infect me with thy foolery! Vengeance will I have on the fellow
who teaches thee such senselessness. Away one of you without delay!
seek yonder seat where he observes his birds, wrench it from its base
with levers, turn it upside down, o'erthrowing it in utter confusion,
and toss his garlands to the tempest's blast. For by so doing shall
I wound him most deeply. Others of you range the city and hunt down
this girl-faced stranger, who is introducing a new complaint amongst
our women, and doing outrage to the marriage tie. And if haply ye
catch him, bring him hither to me in chains, to be stoned to death,
a bitter ending to his revelry in Thebes.  (Exit PENTHEUS.)

TEIRESIAS Unhappy wretch! thou little knowest what thou art saying.
Now art thou become a raving madman, even before unsound in mind.
Let us away, Cadmus, and pray earnestly for him, spite of his savage
temper, and likewise for the city, that the god inflict not a signal
vengeance. Come, follow me with thy ivy-wreathed staff; try to support
my tottering frame as I do thine, for it is unseemly that two old
men should fall; but let that-pass. For we must serve the Bacchic
god, the son of Zeus. Only, Cadmus, beware lest Pentheus' bring sorrow
to thy house; it is not my prophetic art, but circumstances that lead
me to say this; for the words of a fool are folly.  (Exeunt CADMUS
and TEIRESIAS.)  

CHORUS O holiness, queen amongst the gods, sweeping on golden pinion
o'er the earth! dost hear the words of Pentheus, dost hear his proud
blaspheming Bromius, the son of Semele; first of all the blessed gods
at every merry festival? His it is to rouse the revellers to dance,
to laugh away dull care, and wake the flute, whene'er at banquets
of the gods the luscious grape appears, or when the winecup in the
feast sheds sleep on men who wear the ivy-spray. The end of all unbridled
speech and lawless senselessness is misery; but the life of calm repose
and the rule of reason abide unshaken and support the home; for far
away in heaven though they dwell, the powers divine behold man's state.
Sophistry is not wisdom, and to indulge in thoughts beyond man's ken
is to shorten life; and if a man on such poor terms should aim too
high, he may miss the pleasures in his reach. These, to my mind, are
the ways of madmen and idiots. Oh! to make my way to Cyprus, isle
of Aphrodite, where dwell the love-gods strong to soothe man's soul,
or to Paphos, which that foreign river, never fed by rain, enriches
with its hundred mouths! Oh! lead me, Bromian god, celestial guide
of Bacchic pilgrims, to the hallowed slopes of Olympus, where Pierian
Muses have their haunt most fair. There dwell the Graces; there is
soft desire; there thy votaries may hold their revels freely. The
joy of our god, the son of Zeus, is in banquets, his delight is in
peace, that giver of riches and nurse divine of youth. Both to rich
and poor alike hath he granted the delight of wine, that makes all
pain to cease; hateful to him is every one who careth not to live
the life of bliss, that lasts through days and nights of joy. True
wisdom is to keep the heart and soul aloof from over-subtle wits.
That which the less enlightened crowd approves and practises, will
I accept.  (Re-enter PENTHEUS. Enter SERVANT bringing DIONYSUS bound.)

SERVANT We are come, Pentheus, having hunted down this prey, for
which thou didst send us forth; not in vain hath been our quest. We
found our quarry tame; he did not fly from us, but yielded himself
without a struggle; his cheek ne'er blanched, nor did his ruddy colour
change, but with a smile he bade me bind and lead him away, and he
waited, making my task an easy one. For very shame I said to him,
"Against my will, sir stranger, do I lead thee hence, but Pentheus
ordered it, who sent me hither." As for his votaries whom thou thyself
didst check, seizing and binding them hand and foot in the public
gaol, all these have loosed their bonds and fled into the meadows
where they now are sporting, calling aloud on the Bromian god. Their
chains fell off their feet of their own accord, and doors flew open
without man's hand to help. Many a marvel hath this stranger brought
with him to our city of Thebes; what yet remains must be thy care.

PENTHEUS Loose his hands; for now that I have him in the net he is
scarce swift enough to elude me. So, sir stranger, thou art not ill-favoured
from a woman's point of view, which was thy real object in coming
to Thebes; thy hair is long because thou hast never been a wrestler,
flowing right down thy cheeks most wantonly; thy skin is white to
help thee gain thy end, not tanned by ray of sun, but kept within
the shade, as thou goest in quest of love with beauty's bait. Come,
tell me first of thy race. 

DIONYSUS That needs no braggart's tongue, 'tis easily told; maybe
thou knowest Tmolus by hearsay. 

PENTHEUS I know it, the range that rings the city of Sardis round.

DIONYSUS Thence I come, Lydia is my native home. 

PENTHEUS What makes thee bring these mysteries to Hellas?

DIONYSUS Dionysus, the son of Zeus, initiated me. 

PENTHEUS Is there a Zeus in Lydia, who begets new gods?

DIONYSUS No, but Zeus who married Semele in Hellas. 

PENTHEUS Was it by night or in the face of day that he constrained
thee? 

DIONYSUS 'Twas face to face he intrusted his mysteries to me.

PENTHEUS Pray, what special feature stamps thy rites? 

DIONYSUS That is a secret to be hidden from the uninitiated.

PENTHEUS What profit bring they to their votaries? 

DIONYSUS Thou must not be told, though 'tis well worth knowing.

PENTHEUS A pretty piece of trickery, to excite my curiosity!

DIONYSUS A man of godless life is an abomination to the rites of
the god. 

PENTHEUS Thou sayest thou didst see the god clearly; what was he
like? 

DIONYSUS What his fancy chose; I was not there to order this.

PENTHEUS Another clever twist and turn of thine, without a word of
answer. 

DIONYSUS He were a fool, methinks, who would utter wisdom to a fool.

PENTHEUS Hast thou come hither first with this deity? 

DIONYSUS All foreigners already celebrate these mysteries with dances.

PENTHEUS The reason being, they are far behind Hellenes in wisdom.

DIONYSUS In this at least far in advance, though their customs differ.

PENTHEUS Is it by night or day thou performest these devotions?

DIONYSUS By night mostly; darkness lends solemnity. 

PENTHEUS Calculated to entrap and corrupt women. 

DIONYSUS Day too for that matter may discover shame. 

PENTHEUS This vile quibbling settles thy punishment. 

DIONYSUS Brutish ignorance and godlessness will settle thine.

PENTHEUS How bold our Bacchanal is growing! a very master in this
wordy strife! 

DIONYSUS Tell me what I am to suffer; what is the grievous doom thou
wilt inflict upon me? 

PENTHEUS First will I shear off thy dainty tresses. 

DIONYSUS My locks are sacred; for the god I let them grow.

PENTHEUS Next surrender that thyrsus. 

DIONYSUS Take it from me thyself; 'tis the wand of Dionysus I am
bearing. 

PENTHEUS In dungeon deep thy body will I guard. 

DIONYSUS The god himself will set me free, whene'er I list.

PENTHEUS Perhaps he may, when thou standest amid thy Bacchanals and
callest on his name. 

DIONYSUS Even now he is near me and witnesses my treatment.

PENTHEUS Why, where is he? To my eyes he is invisible. 

DIONYSUS He is by my side; thou art a godless man and therefore dost
not see him. 

PENTHEUS Seize him! the fellow scorns me and Thebes too.

DIONYSUS I bid you bind me not, reason addressing madness.

PENTHEUS But I say "bind!" with better right than thou.

DIONYSUS Thou hast no knowledge of the life thou art leading; thy
very existence is now a mystery to thee. 

PENTHEUS I am Pentheus, son of Agave and Echion. 

DIONYSUS Well-named to be misfortune's mate! 

PENTHEUS Avaunt! Ho! shut him up within the horses' stalls hard by,
that for light he may have pitchy gloom. Do thy dancing there, and
these women whom thou bringest with thee to share thy villainies I
will either sell as slaves or make their hands cease from this noisy
beating of drums, and set them to work at the loom as servants of
my own. 

DIONYSUS I will go; for that which fate forbids, can never befall
me. For this thy mockery be sure Dionysus will exact a recompense
of thee-even the god whose existence thou deniest; for thou art injuring
him by haling me to prison.  (Exit DIONYSUS, guarded, and PENTHEUS.)

CHORUS Hail to thee, Dirce, happy maid, daughter revered of Achelous!
within thy founts thou didst receive in days gone by the babe of Zeus,
what time his father caught him up into his thigh from out the deathless
flame, while thus he cried: "Go rest, my Dithyrambus, there within
thy father's womb; by this name, O Bacchic god, I now proclaim thee
to Thebes." But thou, blest Dirce, thrustest me aside, when in thy
midst I strive to hold my revels graced with crowns. Why dost thou
scorn me? Why avoid me? By the clustered charm that Dionysus sheds
o'er the vintage I vow there yet shall come a time when thou wilt
turn thy thoughts to Bromius. What furious rage the earth-born race
displays, even Pentheus sprung of a dragon of old, himself the son
of earth-born Echion, a savage monster in his very mien, not made
in human mould, but like some murderous giant pitted against heaven;
for he means to bind me, the handmaid of Bromius, in cords forthwith,
and e'en now he keeps my fellow-reveller pent within his palace, plunged
in a gloomy dungeon. Dost thou mark this, O Dionysus, son of Zeus,
thy prophets struggling 'gainst resistless might? Come, O king, brandishing
thy golden thyrsus along the slopes of Olympus; restrain the pride
of this bloodthirsty wretch! Oh! where in Nysa, haunt of beasts, or
on the peaks of Corycus art thou, Dionysus, marshalling with thy wand
the revellers? or haply in the thick forest depths of Olympus, where
erst Orpheus with his lute gathered trees to his minstrelsy, and beasts
that range the fields. Ah blest Pieria! Evius honours thee, to thee
will he come with his Bacchic rites to lead the dance, and thither
will he lead the circling Maenads, crossing the swift current of Axius
and the Lydias, that giveth wealth and happiness to man, yea, and
the father of rivers, which, as I have heard, enriches with his waters
fair a land of steeds. 

DIONYSUS  (Within) What ho! my Bacchantes, ho! hear my call, oh!
hear. 

CHORUS Who art thou? what Evian cry is this that calls me? whence
comes it? 

DIONYSUS What ho! once more I call, I the son of Semele, the child
of Zeus. 

CHORUS II My master, O my master, hail! 

CHORUS III Come to our revel-band, O Bromian god. 

CHORUS IV Thou solid earth! 

CHORUS Most awful shock! 

CHORUS VI O horror! soon will the palace of Pentheus totter and fall.

CHORUS VII Dionysus is within this house. 

CHORUS VIII Do homage to him. 

CHORUS IX We do! I do! 

CHORUS Did ye mark yon architrave of stone upon the columns start
asunder? 

CHORUS XI Within these walls the triumph-shout of Bromius himself
will rise. 

DIONYSUS Kindle the blazing torch with lightning's fire, abandon
to the flames the halls of Pentheus. 

CHORUS XII Ha! dost not see the flame, dost not clearly mark it at
the sacred tomb of Semele, the lightning flame which long ago the
hurler of the bolt left there? 

CHORUS XIII Your trembling limbs prostrate, ye Maenads, low upon
the ground. 

CHORUS XIV Yea, for our king, the son of Zeus, is assailing and utterly
confounding this house.  (Enter DIONYSUS.)  

DIONYSUS Are ye so stricken with terror that ye have fallen to the
earth, O foreign dames? Ye saw then, it would seem, how the Bacchic
god made Pentheus' halls to quake; but arise, be of good heart, compose
your trembling limbs. 

CHORUS O chiefest splendour of our gladsome Bacchic sport, with what
joy I see thee in my loneliness! 

DIONYSUS Were ye cast down when I was led into the house, to be plunged
into the gloomy dungeons of Pentheus? 

CHORUS Indeed I was. Who was to protect me, if thou shouldst meet
with mishap? But how wert thou set free from the clutches of this
godless wretch? 

DIONYSUS My own hands worked out my own salvation, easily and without
trouble. 

CHORUS But did he not lash fast thy hands with cords? 

DIONYSUS There too I mocked him; he thinks he bound me, whereas he
never touched or caught hold of me, but fed himself on fancy. For
at the stall, to which he brought me for a gaol, he found a bull,
whose legs and hoofs he straightly tied, breathing out fury the while,
the sweat trickling from his body, and he biting his lips; but I from
near at hand sat calmly looking on. Meantime came the Bacchic god
and made the house quake, and at his mother's tomb relit the fire;
but Pentheus, seeing this, thought his palace was ablaze, and hither
and thither he rushed, bidding his servants bring water; but all in
vain was every servant's busy toil. Thereon he let this labour be
awhile, and, thinking maybe that I had escaped, rushed into the palace
with his murderous sword unsheathed. Then did Bromius-so at least
it seemed to me; I only tell you what I thought-made a phantom in
the hall, and he rushed after it in headlong haste, and stabbed the
lustrous air, thinking he wounded me. Further the Bacchic god did
other outrage to him; he dashed the building to the ground, and there
it lies a mass of ruin, a sight to make him rue most bitterly my bonds.
At last from sheer fatigue he dropped his sword and fell fainting;
for he a mortal frail, dared to wage war upon a god; but I meantime
quietly left the house and am come to you, with never a thought of
Pentheus. But methinks he will soon appear before the house; at least
there is a sound of steps within. What will he say, I wonder, after
this? Well, be his fury never so great, I will lightly bear it; for
'tis a wise man's way to school his temper into due control.  (Enter
PENTHEUS.)  

PENTHEUS Shamefully have I been treated; that stranger, whom but
now I made so fast in prison, hath escaped me. Ha! there is the man!
What means this? How didst thou come forth, to appear thus in front
of my palace? 

DIONYSUS Stay where thou art; and moderate thy fury. 

PENTHEUS How is it thou hast escaped thy fetters and art at large?

DIONYSUS Did I not say, or didst thou not hear me, "There is one
will loose me." 

PENTHEUS Who was it? there is always something strange in what thou
sayest. 

DIONYSUS He who makes the clustering vine to grow for man.

PENTHEUS (I scorn him and his vines!) 

DIONYSUS A fine taunt indeed thou hurlest here at Dionysus!

PENTHEUS  (To his servants) Bar every tower that hems us in, I order
you. 

DIONYSUS What use? Cannot gods pass even over walls? 

PENTHEUS How wise thou art, except where thy wisdom is needed!

DIONYSUS Where most 'tis needed, there am I most wise. But first
listen to yonder messenger and hear what he says; he comes from the
hills with tidings for thee; and I will await thy pleasure, nor seek
to fly.  (Enter MESSENGER.)  Messenger. 
Pentheus, ruler of this realm of Thebes! I am come from Cithaeron,
where the dazzling flakes of pure white snow ne'er cease to fall.

PENTHEUS What urgent news dost bring me? 

MESSENGER I have seen, O king, those frantic Bacchanals, who darted
in frenzy from this land with bare white feet, and I am come to tell
thee and the city the wondrous deeds they do, deeds passing strange.
But I fain would hear, whether I am freely to tell all I saw there,
or shorten my story; for I fear thy hasty temper, sire, thy sudden
bursts of wrath and more than princely rage. 

PENTHEUS Say on, for thou shalt go unpunished by me in all respects;
for to be angered with the upright is wrong. The direr thy tale about
the Bacchantes, the heavier punishment will I inflict on this fellow
who brought his secret arts amongst our women. 

MESSENGER I was just driving the herds of kine to a ridge of the
hill as I fed them, as the sun shot forth his rays and made the earth
grow warm; when lo! I see three revel-bands of women; Autonoe was
chief of one, thy mother Agave of the second, while Ino's was the
third. There they lay asleep, all tired out; some were resting on
branches of the pine, others had laid their heads in careless ease
on oak-leaves piled upon the ground, observing all modesty; not, as
thou sayest, seeking to gratify their lusts alone amid the woods,
by wine and soft flute-music maddened. 

Anon in their midst thy mother uprose and cried aloud to wake them
from their sleep, when she heard the lowing of my horned kine. And
up they started to their feet, brushing from their eyes sleep's quickening
dew, a wondrous sight of grace and modesty, young and old and maidens
yet unwed. First o'er their shoulders they let stream their hair;
then all did gird their fawn-skins up, who hitherto had left the fastenings
loose, girdling the dappled hides with snakes that licked their cheeks.
Others fondled in their arms gazelles or savage whelps of wolves,
and suckled them-young mothers these with babes at home, whose breasts
were still full of milk; crowns they wore of ivy or of oak or blossoming
convolvulus. And one took her thyrsus and struck it into the earth,
and forth there gushed a limpid spring; and another plunged her wand
into the lap of earth and there the god sent up a fount of wine; and
all who wished for draughts of milk had but to scratch the soil with
their finger-tips and there they had it in abundance, while from every
ivy-wreathed staff sweet rills of honey trickled. 

Hadst thou been there and seen this, thou wouldst have turned to pray
to the god, whom now thou dost disparage. Anon we herdsmen and shepherds
met to discuss their strange and wondrous doings; then one, who wandereth
oft to town and hath a trick of speech, made harangue in the midst,
"O ye who dwell upon the hallowed mountain-terraces! shall we chase
Agave, mother of Pentheus, from her Bacchic rites, and thereby do
our prince a service?" We liked his speech, and placed ourselves in
hidden ambush among the leafy thickets; they at the appointed time
began to wave the thyrsus for their Bacchic rites, calling on Iacchus,
the Bromian god, the son of Zeus, in united chorus, and the whole
mount and the wild creatures re-echoed their cry; all nature stirred
as they rushed on. Now Agave chanced to come springing near me, so
up I leapt from out my ambush where I lay concealed, meaning to seize
her. But she cried out, "What ho! my nimble hounds, here are men upon
our track; but follow me, ay, follow, with the thyrsus in your hand
for weapon." Thereat we fled, to escape being torn in pieces by the
Bacchantes; but they, with hands that bore no weapon of steel, attacked
our cattle as they browsed. Then wouldst thou have seen Agave mastering
some sleek lowing calf, while others rent the heifers limb from limb.
Before thy eyes there would have been hurling of ribs and hoofs this
way and that; and strips of flesh, all blood-bedabbled, dripped as
they hung from the pine-branches. Wild bulls, that glared but now
with rage along their horns, found themselves tripped up, dragged
down to earth by countless maidens' hands. The flesh upon their limbs
was stripped therefrom quicker than thou couldst have closed thy royal
eye-lids. Then off they sped, like birds that skim the air, to the
plains beneath the hills, which bear a fruitful harvest for Thebes
beside the waters of Asopus; to Hysiae and Erythrae, hamlets 'neath
Cithaeron's peak, with fell intent, swooping on everything and scattering
all pellmell; and they would snatch children from their homes; but
all that they placed upon their shoulders, abode there firmly without
being tied, and fell not to the dusky earth, not even brass or iron;
and on their hair they carried fire and it burnt them not; but the
country-folk rushed to arms, furious at being pillaged by Bacchanals;
whereon ensued, O king, this wondrous spectacle. For though the ironshod
dart would draw no blood from them, they with the thyrsus, which they
hurled, caused many a wound and put their foes to utter rout, women
chasing men, by some god's intervention. Then they returned to the
place whence they had started, even to the springs the god had made
to spout for them; and there washed off the blood, while serpents
with their tongues were licking clean each gout from their cheeks.
Wherefore, my lord and master, receive this deity, whoe'er he be,
within the city; for, great as he is in all else, I have likewise
heard men say, 'twas he that gave the vine to man, sorrow's antidote.
Take wine away and Cypris flies, and every other human joy is dead.

CHORUS Though I fear to speak my mind with freedom in the presence
of my king, still must I utter this; Dionysus yields to no deity in
might. 

PENTHEUS Already, look you! the presumption of these Bacchantes is
upon us, swift as fire, a sad disgrace in the eyes of all Hellas.
No time for hesitation now! away to the Electra gate! order a muster
of all my men-at-arms, of those that mount fleet steeds, of all who
brandish light bucklers, of archers too that make the bowstring twang;
for I will march against the Bacchanals. By Heaven I this passes all,
if we are to be thus treated by women.  (Exit MESSENGER.)

DIONYSUS Still obdurate, O Pentheus, after hearing my words! In spite
of all the evil treatment I am enduring from thee, still I warn thee
of the sin of bearing arms against a god, and bid thee cease; for
Bromius will not endure thy driving his votaries from the mountains
where they revel. 

PENTHEUS A truce to thy preaching to me! thou hast escaped thy bonds,
preserve thy liberty; else will I renew thy punishment. 

DIONYSUS I would rather do him sacrifice than in a fury kick against
the pricks; thou a mortal, he a god. 

PENTHEUS Sacrifice! that will I, by setting afoot a wholesale slaughter
of women 'mid Cithaeron's glens, as they deserve. 

DIONYSUS Ye will all be put to flight-a shameful thing that they
with the Bacchic thyrsus should rout your mail-clad warriors.

PENTHEUS I find this stranger a troublesome foe to encounter; doing
or suffering he is alike irrepressible. 

DIONYSUS Friend, there is still a way to compose this bitterness.

PENTHEUS Say how; am I to serve my own servants? 

DIONYSUS I will bring the women hither without weapons.

PENTHEUS Ha! ha! this is some crafty scheme of thine against me.

DIONYSUS What kind of scheme, if by my craft I purpose to save thee?

PENTHEUS You have combined with them to form this plot, that your
revels may on for ever. 

DIONYSUS Nay, but this is the compact I made with the god; be sure
of that. 

PENTHEUS  (Preparing to start forth) Bring forth my arms. Not another
word from thee! 

DIONYSUS Ha! wouldst thou see them seated on the hills?

PENTHEUS Of all things, yes! I would give untold sums for that.

DIONYSUS Why this sudden, strong desire? 

PENTHEUS 'Twill be a bitter sight, if I find them drunk with wine.

DIONYSUS And would that be a pleasant sight which will prove bitter
to thee? 

PENTHEUS Believe me, yes! beneath the fir-trees as I sit in silence.

DIONYSUS Nay, they will track thee, though thou come secretly.

PENTHEUS Well, I will go openly; thou wert right to say so.

DIONYSUS Am I to be thy guide? wilt thou essay the road?

PENTHEUS Lead on with all speed, I grudge thee all delay.

DIONYSUS Array thee then in robes of fine linen. 

PENTHEUS Why so? Am I to enlist among women after being a man?

DIONYSUS They may kill thee, if thou show thy manhood there.

PENTHEUS Well said! Thou hast given me a taste of thy wit already.

DIONYSUS Dionysus schooled me in this lore. 

PENTHEUS How am I to carry out thy wholesome advice? 

DIONYSUS Myself will enter thy palace and robe thee. 

PENTHEUS What is the robe to be? a woman's? Nay, I am ashamed.

DIONYSUS Thy eagerness to see the Maenads goes no further.

PENTHEUS But what dress dost say thou wilt robe me in? 

DIONYSUS Upon thy head will I make thy hair grow long. 

PENTHEUS Describe my costume further. 

DIONYSUS Thou wilt wear a robe reaching to thy feet; and on thy head
shall be a snood. 

PENTHEUS Wilt add aught else to my attire? 

DIONYSUS A thyrsus in thy hand, and a dappled fawnskin.

PENTHEUS I can never put on woman's dress. 

DIONYSUS Then wilt thou cause bloodshed by coming to blows with the
Bacchanals. 

PENTHEUS Thou art right. Best go spy upon them first. 

DIONYSUS Well, e'en that is wiser than by evil means to follow evil
ends. 

PENTHEUS But how shall I pass through the city of the Cadmeans unseen?

DIONYSUS We will go by unfrequented paths. I will lead the way.

PENTHEUS Anything rather than that the Bacchantes should laugh at
me. 

DIONYSUS We will enter the palace and consider the proper steps.

PENTHEUS Thou hast my leave. I am all readiness. I will enter, prepared
to set out either sword in hand or following thy advice.  (Exit PENTHEUS.)

DIONYSUS Women! our prize is nearly in the net. Soon shall he reach
the Bacchanals, and there pay forfeit with his life. O Dionysus! now
'tis thine to act, for thou art not far away; let us take vengeance
on him. First drive him mad by fixing in his soul a wayward frenzy;
for never, whilst his senses are his own, will he consent to don a
woman's dress; but when his mind is gone astray he will put it on.
And fain would I make him a laughing-stock to Thebes as he is led
in woman's dress through the city, after those threats with which
he menaced me before. But I will go to array Pentheus in those robes
which he shall wear when he sets out for Hades' halls, a victim to
his own mother's fury; so shall he recognize Dionysus, the son of
Zeus, who proves himself at last a god most terrible, for all his
gentleness to man.  (Exit DIONYSUS.)  

CHORUS Will this white foot e'er join the night-long dance? what
time in Bacchic ecstasy I toss my neck to heaven's dewy breath, like
a fawn, that gambols 'mid the meadow's green delights, when she hath
escaped the fearful chase, clear of the watchers, o'er the woven nets;
while the huntsman, with loud halloo, harks on his hounds' full cry,
and she with laboured breath at lightning speed bounds o'er the level
water-meadows, glad to be far from man amid the foliage of the bosky
grove. What is true wisdom, or what fairer boon has heaven placed
in mortals' reach, than to gain the mastery o'er a fallen foe? What
is fair is dear for aye. Though slow be its advance, yet surely moves
the power of the gods, correcting those mortal wights, that court
a senseless pride, or, in the madness of their fancy, disregard the
gods. Subtly they lie in wait, through the long march of time, and
so hunt down the godless man. For it is never right in theory or in
practice to o'erride the law of custom. This is a maxim cheaply bought:
whatever comes of God, or in time's long annals, has grown into a
law upon a natural basis, this is sovereign. What is true wisdom,
or what fairer boon has heaven placed in mortals' reach, than to gain
the mastery o'er a fallen foe? What is fair is dear for ave. Happy
is he who hath escaped the wave from out the sea, and reached the
haven; and happy he who hath triumphed o'er his troubles; though one
surpasses another in wealth and power; yet there be myriad hopes for
all the myriad minds; some end in happiness for man, and others come
to naught; but him, whose life from day to day is blest, I deem a
happy man.  (Enter DIONYSUS.)  

DIONYSUS Ho! Pentheus, thou that art so cager to see what is forbidden,
and to show thy zeal in an unworthy cause, come forth before the palace,
let me see thee clad as a woman in frenzied Bacchante's dress, to
spy upon thy own mother and her company.  (Enter PENTHEUS.)  Yes,
thou resemblest closely a daughter of Cadmus. 

PENTHEUS Of a truth I seem to see two suns, and two towns of Thebes,
our seven-gated city; and thou, methinks, art a bull going before
to guide me, and on thy head a pair of horns have grown. Wert thou
really once a brute beast? Thon hast at any rate the appearance of
a bull. 

DIONYSUS The god attends us, ungracious heretofore, but now our sworn
friend; and now thine eyes behold the things they should.

PENTHEUS Pray, what do I resemble? Is not mine the carriage of Ino,
or Agave my own mother? 

DIONYSUS In seeing thee, I seem to see them in person. But this tress
is straying from its place, no longer as I bound it 'neath the snood.

PENTHEUS I disarranged it from its place as I tossed it to and fro
within my chamber, in Bacchic ecstasy. 

DIONYSUS Well, I will rearrange it, since to tend thee is my care;
hold up thy head. 

PENTHEUS Come, put it straight; for on thee do I depend.

DIONYSUS Thy girdle is loose, and the folds of thy dress do not hang
evenly below thy ankles. 

PENTHEUS I agree to that as regards the right side, but on the other
my dress hangs straight with my foot. 

DIONYSUS Surely thou wilt rank me first among thy friends, when contrary
to thy expectation thou findest the Bacchantes virtuous.

PENTHEUS Shall I hold the thyrsus in the right or left hand to look
most like a Bacchanal? 

DIONYSUS Hold it in thy right hand, and step out with thy right foot;
thy change of mind compels thy praise. 

PENTHEUS Shall I be able to carry on my shoulders Cithaeron's glens,
the Bacchanals and all? 

DIONYSUS Yes, if so thou wilt; for though thy mind was erst diseased,
'tis now just as it should be. 

PENTHEUS Shall we take levers, or with my hands can I uproot it,
thrusting arm or shoulder 'neath its peaks? 

DIONYSUS No, no! destroy not the seats of the Nymphs and the haunts
of Pan, the place of his piping. 

PENTHEUS Well said! Women must not be mastered by brute force; amid
the pines will I conceal myself. 

DIONYSUS Thou shalt hide thee in the place that fate appoints, coming
by stealth to spy upon the Bacchanals. 

PENTHEUS Why, methinks they are already caught in the pleasant snares
of dalliance, like birds amid the brakes. 

DIONYSUS Set out with watchful heed then for this very purpose; maybe
thou wilt catch them, if thou be not first caught thyself.

PENTHEUS Conduct me through the very heart of Thebes, for I am the
only man among them bold enough to do this deed. 

DIONYSUS Thou alone bearest thy country's burden, thou and none other;
wherefore there await thee such struggles as needs must. Follow me,
for I will guide thee safely thither; another shall bring thee thence.

PENTHEUS My mother maybe. 

DIONYSUS For every eye to see. 

PENTHEUS My very purpose in going. 

DIONYSUS Thou shalt be carried back, 

PENTHEUS What luxury 

DIONYSUS In thy mother's arms. 

PENTHEUS Thou wilt e'en force me into luxury. 

DIONYSUS Yes, to luxury such as this. 

PENTHEUS Truly, the task I am undertaking deserves it.  (Exit PENTHEUS.)

DIONYSUS Strange, ah! strange is thy career, leading to scenes of
woe so strange, that thou shalt achieve a fame that towers to heaven.
Stretch forth thy hands, Agave, and ye her sisters, daughters of Cadmus;
mighty is the strife to which I am bringing the youthful king, and
the victory shall rest with me and Bromius; all else the event will
show.  (Exit DIONYSUS.)  

CHORUS To the hills! to the hills! fleet hounds of madness, where
the daughters of Cadmus hold their revels, goad them into wild fury
against the man disguised in woman's dress, a frenzied spy upon the
Maenads. First shall his mother mark him as he peers from some smooth
rock or riven tree, and thus to the Maenads she will call, "Who is
this of Cadmus' sons comes hasting to the mount, to the mountain away,
to spy on us, my Bacchanals? Whose child can he be? For he was never
born of woman's blood; but from some lioness maybe or Libyan Gorgon
is he sprung." Let justice appear and show herself, sword in hand,
to plunge it through and through the throat of the godless, lawless,
impious son of Echion, earth's monstrous child! who with wicked heart
and lawless rage, with mad intent and frantic purpose, sets out to
meddle with thy holy rites, and with thy mother's, Bacchic god, thinking
with his weak arm to master might as masterless as thine. This is
the life that saves all pain, if a man confine his thoughts to human
themes, as is his mortal nature, making no pretence where heaven is
concerned. I envy not deep subtleties; far other joys have I, in tracking
out great truths writ clear from all eternity, that a man should live
his life by day and night in purity and holiness, striving toward
a noble goal, and should honour the gods by casting from him each
ordinance that lies outside the pale of right. Let justice show herself,
advancing sword in hand to plunge it through and through the throat
of Echion's son, that godless, lawless, and abandoned child of earth!
Appear, O Bacchus, to our eyes as a bull or serpent with a hundred
heads, or take the shape of a lion breathing flame! Oh! come, and
with a mocking smile cast the deadly noose about the hunter of thy
Bacchanals, e'en as he swoops upon the Maenads gathered yonder.  (Enter
SECOND MESSENGER.)  

SECOND MESSENGER O house, so prosperous once through Hellas long
ago, home of the old Sidonian prince, who sowed the serpent's crop
of earth-born men, how do I mourn thee! slave though I be, yet still
the sorrows of his master touch a good slave's heart. 

CHORUS How now? Hast thou fresh tidings of the Bacchantes?

SECOND MESSENGER Pentheus, Echion's son is dead. 

CHORUS Bromius, my king! now art thou appearing in thy might divine.

SECOND MESSENGER Ha! what is it thou sayest? art thou glad, woman,
at my master's misfortunes? 

CHORUS A stranger I, and in foreign tongue I express my joy, for
now no more do I cower in terror of the chain. 

SECOND MESSENGER Dost think Thebes so poor in men?(*, * Probably
the whole of one iambic line with part of another is here lost.)

CHORUS 'Tis Dionysus, Dionysus, not Thebes that lords it over me.

SECOND MESSENGER All can I pardon thee save this; to exult o'er hopeless
suffering is sorry conduct, dames. 

CHORUS Tell me, oh! tell me how he died, that villain scheming villainy!

SECOND MESSENGER Soon as we had left the homesteads of this Theban
land and had crossed the streams of Asopus, we began to breast Cithaeron's
heights, Pentheus and I, for I went with my master, and the stranger
too, who was to guide us to the scene. First then we sat us down in
a grassy glen, carefully silencing each footfall and whispered breath,
to see without being seen. Now there was a dell walled in by rocks,
with rills to water it, and shady pines o'erhead; there were the Maenads
seated, busied with joyous toils. Some were wreathing afresh the drooping
thyrsus with curling ivy-sprays; others, like colts let loose from
the carved chariot-yoke, were answering each other in hymns of Bacchic
rapture. But Pentheus, son of sorrow, seeing not the women gathered
there, exclaimed, "Sir stranger, from where I stand, I cannot clearly
see the mock Bacchantes; but I will climb a hillock or a soaring pine
whence to see clearly the shameful doings of the Bacchanals." Then
and there I saw the stranger work a miracle; for catching a lofty
fir-branch by the very end he drew it downward to the dusky earth,
lower yet and ever lower; and like a bow it bent, or rounded wheel,
whose curving circle grows complete, as chalk and line describe it;
e'en so the stranger drew down the mountain-branch between his hands,
bending it to earth, by more than human agency. And when he had seated
Pentheus aloft on the pine branches, he let them slip through his
hands gently, careful not to shake him from his seat. Up soared the
branch straight into the air above, with my master perched thereon,
seen by the Maenads better far than he saw them; for scarce was he
beheld upon his lofty throne, when the stranger disappeared, while
from the sky there came a voice, 'twould seem, by Dionysus uttered-

"Maidens, I bring the man who tried to mock you and me and my mystic
rites; take vengeance on him." And as he spake he raised 'twixt heaven
and earth a dazzling column of awful flame. Hushed grew the sky, and
still hung each leaf throughout the grassy glen, nor couldst thou
have heard one creature cry. But they, not sure of the voice they
heard, sprang up and peered all round; then once again his bidding
came; and when the daughters of Cadmus knew it was the Bacchic god
in very truth that called, swift as doves they dirted off in cager
haste, his mother Agave and her sisters dear and all the Bacchanals;
through torrent glen, o'er boulders huge they bounded on, inspired
with madness by the god. Soon as they saw my master perched upon the
fir, they set to hurling stones at him with all their might, mounting
a commanding eminence, and with pine-branches he was pelted as with
darts; and others shot their wands through the air at Pentheus, their
hapless target, but all to no purpose. For there he sat beyond the
reach of their hot endeavours, a helpless, hopeless victim. At last
they rent off limbs from oaks and were for prising up the roots with
levers not of iron. But when they still could make no end to all their
toil, Agave cried: "Come stand around, and grip the sapling trunk,
my Bacchanals! that we may catch the beast that sits thereon, lest
he divulge the secrets of our god's religion." 

Then were a thousand hands laid on the fir, and from the ground they
tore it up, while he from his seat aloft came tumbling to the ground
with lamentations long and loud, e'en Pentheus; for well he knew his
hour was come. His mother first, a priestess for the nonce, began
the bloody deed and fell upon him; whereon he tore the snood from
off his hair, that hapless Agave might recognize and spare him, crying
as he touched her cheek, "O mother! it is I, thy own son Pentheus,
the child thou didst bear in Echion's halls; have pity on me, mother
dear! oh! do not for any sin of mine slay thy own son." 

But she, the while, with foaming mouth and wildly rolling eyes, bereft
of reason as she was, heeded him not; for the god possessed her. And
she caught his left hand in her grip, and planting her foot upon her
victim's trunk she tore the shoulder from its socket, not of her own
strength, but the god made it an easy task to her hands; and Ino set
to work upon the other side, rending the flesh with Autonoe and all
the eager host of Bacchanals; and one united cry arose, the victim's
groans while yet he breathed, and their triumphant shouts. One would
make an arm her prey, another a foot with the sandal on it; and his
ribs were stripped of flesh by their rending nails; and each one with
blood-dabbled hands was tossing Pentheus' limbs about. Scattered lies
his corpse, part beneath the rugged rocks, and part amid the deep
dark woods, no easy task to find; but his poor head hath his mother
made her own, and fixing it upon the point of a thyrsus, as it had
been a mountain lion's, she bears it through the midst of Cithaeron,
having left her sisters with the Maenads at their rites. And she is
entering these walls exulting in her hunting fraught with woe, calling
on the Bacchic god her fellow-hunter who had helped her to triumph
in a chase, where her only prize was tears. 

But I will get me hence, away from this piteous scene, before Agave
reach the palace. To my mind self-restraint and reverence for the
things of God point alike the best and wisest course for all mortals
who pursue them.  (Exit SECOND MESSENGER.)  

CHORUS Come, let us exalt our Bacchic god in choral strain, let us
loudly chant the fall of Pentheus from the serpent sprung, who assumed
a woman's dress and took the fair Bacchic wand, sure pledge of death,
with a bull to guide him to his doom. O ye Bacchanals of Thebes! glorious
is the triumph ye have achieved, ending in sorrow and tears. 'Tis
a noble enterprise to dabble the hand in the blood of a son till it
drips. But hist! I see Agave, the mother of Pentheus, with wild rolling
eye hasting to the house; welcome the revellers of the Bacchic god.
(Enter AGAVE.)  

AGAVE Ye Bacchanals from Asia 

CHORUS Why dost thou rouse me? why? 

AGAVE From the hills I am bringing to my home a tendril freshly-culled,
glad guerdon-of the chase. 

CHORUS I see it, and I will welcome thee unto our revels. All hail!

AGAVE I caught him with never a snare, this lion's whelp, as ye may
see. 

CHORUS From what desert lair? 

AGAVE Cithaeron- 

CHORUS Yes, Cithaeron? 

AGAVE Was his death. 

CHORUS Who was it gave the first blow? 

AGAVE Mine that privilege; "Happy Agave!" they call me 'mid our revellers.

CHORUS Who did the rest? 

AGAVE Cadmus- 

CHORUS What of him? 

AGAVE His daughters struck the monster after me; yes, after me.

CHORUS Fortune smiled upon thy hunting here. 

AGAVE Come, share the banquet. 

CHORUS Share? ah I what? 

AGAVE 'Tis but a tender whelp, the down just sprouting on its cheek
beneath a crest of failing hair. 

CHORUS The hair is like some wild creature's. 

AGAVE The Bacchic god, a hunter skilled, roused his Maenads to pursue
this quarry skilfully. 

CHORUS Yea, our king is a hunter indeed. 

AGAVE Dost approve? 

CHORUS Of course I do. 

AGAVE Soon shall the race of Cadmus- 

CHORUS And Pentheus, her own son, shall to his mother- 

AGAVE Offer praise for this her quarry of the lion's brood.

CHORUS Quarry strange! 

AGAVE And strangely caught. 

CHORUS Dost thou exult? 

AGAVE Right glad am I to have achieved a great and glorious triumph
for my land that all can see. 

CHORUS Alas for thee! show to the folk the booty thou hast won and
art bringing hither. 

AGAVE All ye who dwell in fair fenced Thebes, draw near that ye may
see the fierce wild beast that we daughters of Cadmus made our prey,
not with the thong-thrown darts of Thessaly, nor yet with snares,
but with our fingers fair. Ought men idly to boast and get them armourers'
weapons? when we with these our hands have caught this prey and torn
the monster limb from limb? Where is my aged sire? let him approach.
And where is Pentheus, my son? Let him bring a ladder and raise it
against the house to nail up on the gables this lion's head, my booty
from the chase.  (Enter CADMUS.)  

CADMUS Follow me, servants to the palace-front, with your sad burden
in your arms, ay, follow, with the corpse of Pentheus, which after
long weary search I found, as ye see it, torn to pieces amid Cithaeron's
glens, and am bringing hither; no two pieces did I find together,
as they lay scattered through the trackless wood. For I heard what
awful deeds one of my daughters had done, just as I entered the city-walls
with old Teiresias returning from the Bacchanals; so I turned again
unto the and bring from thence my son who was slain by Maenads. There
I saw Autonoe, that bare Actaeon on a day to Aristaeus, and Ino with
her, still ranging the oak-groves in their unhappy frenzy; but one
told me that that Agave, was rushing wildly hither, nor was it idly
said, for there I see her, sight of woe! 

AGAVE Father, loudly mayst thou boast, that the daughters thou hast
begotten are far the best of mortal race; of one and all I speak,
though chiefly of myself, who left my shuttle at the loom for nobler
enterprise, even to hunt savage beasts with my hands; and in my arms
I bring my prize, as thou seest, that it may be nailed up on thy palace-wall;
take it, father, in thy had and proud of my hunting, call thy friends
to a banquet; for blest art thou, ah! doubly blest in these our gallant
exploits. 

CADMUS O grief that has no bounds, too cruel for mortal eye! 'tis
murder ye have done with your hapless hands. Fair is the victim thou
hast offered to the gods, inviting me and my Thebans to the feast
Ah, woe is me first for thy sorrows, then for mine. What ruin the
god, the Bromian king, hath brought on us, just maybe, but too severe,
seeing he is our kinsman! 

AGAVE How peevish old age makes men! what sullen looks! Oh, may my
son follow in his mother's footsteps and be as lucky in his hunting,
when he goes quest of game in company with Theban youthsl But he can
do naught but wage war with gods. Father, 'tis thy duty to warn him.
Who will summon him hither to my sight to witness my happiness?

CADMUS Alas for you! alas! Terrible will be your grief when ye are
conscious of your deeds; could ye re. for ever till life's close in
your present state, ye would not, spite of ruined bliss, appear so
cursed with woe. 

AGAVE Why? what is faulty bere? what here for sorrow? 

CADMUS First let thine eye look up to heaven. 

AGAVE See! I do so. Why dost thou suggest my looking thereupon?

CADMUS Is it still the same, or dost think there's any change?

AGAVE 'Tis brighter than it was, and dearer too. 

CADMUS Is there still that wild unrest within thy soul?

AGAVE I know not what thou sayest now; yet methinks my brain is clearing,
and my former frenzy passed away. 

CADMUS Canst understand, and give distinct replies? 

AGAVE Father, how completely I forget all we said before!

CADMUS To what house wert thou brought with marriage-hymns?

AGAVE Thou didst give me to earthborn Echion, as men call him.

CADMUS What child was born thy husband in his halls? 

AGAVE Pentheus, of my union with his father. 

CADMUS What head is that thou barest in thy arms? 

AGAVE A lion's; at least they said so, who hunted it. 

CADMUS Consider it aright; 'tis no great task to look at it.

AGAVE Ah! what do I see? what is this I am carrying in my hands?

CADMUS Look closely at it; make thy knowledge more certain.

AGAVE Ah, 'woe is me! O sight of awful sorrow! 

CADMUS Dost think it like a lion's head? 

AGAVE Ah no! 'tis Pentheus' head which I his unhappy mother hold.

CADMUS Bemoaned by me, or ever thou didst recognize him.

AGAVE Who slew him? How came he into my hands? 

CADMUS O piteous truth! how ill-timed thy presence here!

AGAVE Speak; my bosom throbs at this suspense. 

CADMUS 'Twas thou didst slay him, thou and thy sisters.

AGAVE Where died he? in the house or where? 

CADMUS On the very spot where hounds of yore rent Actaeon in pieces.

AGAVE Why went he, wretched youth! to Cithaeron? 

CADMUS He would go and mock the god and thy Bacchic rites.

AGAVE But how was it we had journeyed thither? 

CADMUS Ye were distraught; the whole city had the Bacchic frenzy.

AGAVE 'Twas Dionysus proved our ruin; now I see it all.

CADMUS Yes, for the slight he suffered; ye would not believe in his
godhead. 

AGAVE Father, where is my dear child's corpse? 

CADMUS With toil I searched it out and am bringing it myself.

AGAVE Is it all fitted limb to limb in seemly wise? 
CADMUS (*, * One line, or maybe more, is missing) 

AGAVE But what had Pentheus to do with folly of mine? 

CADMUS He was like you in refusing homage to the god, who, therefore,
hath involved you all in one common ruin, you and him alike, to destroy
this house and me, forasmuch as I, that had no sons, behold this youth,
the fruit of thy womb, unhappy mother! foully and most shamefully
slain. To thee, my child, our house looked up, to thee my daughter's
son, the stay of my palace, inspiring the city with awe; none caring
to flout the old king when he saw thee by, for he would get his deserts.
But now shall I be cast out dishonoured from my halls, Cadmus the
great, who sowed the crop of Theban seed and reaped that goodly harvest.
O beloved child! dead though thou art, thou still shalt be counted
by me amongst my own dear children; no more wilt thou lay thy hand
upon my chin in fond embrace, my child, and calling on thy mother's
sire demand, "Who wrongs thee or dishonours thee, old sire? who vexes
thy heart, a thorn within thy side? Speak, that I may punish thy oppressor,
father mine!" 

But now am I in sorrow plunged, and woe is thee, and woe thy mother
and her suffering sisters too! Ah! if there be any man that scorns
the gods, let him well mark this prince's death and then believe in
them. 

CHORUS Cadmus, I am sorry for thy fate; for though thy daughter's
child hath met but his deserts, 'tis bitter grief to thee.

AGAVE O father, thou seest how sadly my fortune is changed.(*, *
After this a very large lacuna occurs in the MS.) 

DIONYSUS Thou shalt be changed into a serpent; and thy wife Harmonia,
Ares' child, whom thou in thy human life didst wed, shall change her
nature for a snake's, and take its form. With her shalt thou, as leader
of barbarian tribes, drive thy team of steers, so saith an oracle
of Zeus; and many a city shalt thou sack with an army numberless;
but in the day they plunder the oracle of Loxias, shall they rue their
homeward march; but thee and Harmonia will Ares rescue, and set thee
to live henceforth in the land of the blessed. This do I declare,
I Dionysus, son of no mortal father but of Zeus. Had ye learnt wisdom
when ye would not, ye would now be happy with the son of Zeus for
your ally. 

AGAVE O Dionysus! we have sinned; thy pardon we implore.

DIONYSUS Too late have ye learnt to know me; ye knew me not at the
proper time. 

AGAVE We recognize our error; but thou art too revengeful.

DIONYSUS Yea, for I, though a god, was slighted by you.

AGAVE Gods should not let their passion sink to man's level.

DIONYSUS Long ago my father Zeus ordained it thus. 

AGAVE Alas! my aged sire, our doom is fixed; 'tis woful exile.

DIONYSUS Why then delay the inevitable? Exit. 

CADMUS Daughter, to what an awful pass are we now come, thou too,
poor child, and thy sisters, while I alas! in my old age must seek
barbarian shores, to sojourn there; but the oracle declares that I
shall yet lead an army, half-barbarian, half-Hellene, to Hellas; and
in serpent's shape shall I carry my wife Harmonia, the daughter of
Ares, transformed like me to a savage snake, against the altars and
tombs of Hellas at the head of my troops; nor shall I ever cease from
my woes, ah me! nor ever cross the downward stream of Acheron and
be at rest. 

AGAVE Father, I shall be parted from thee and exiled. 

CADMUS Alas! my child, why fling thy arms around me, as a snowy cygnet
folds its wings about the frail old swan? 

AGAVE Whither can I turn, an exile from my country? 

CADMUS I know not, my daughter; small help is thy father now.

AGAVE Farewell, my home! farewell, my native city! with sorrow I
am leaving thee, an exile from my bridal bower. 

CADMUS Go, daughter, to the house of Aristaeus,(*, * Another large
lacuna follows.) 

AGAVE Father, I mourn for thee. 

CADMUS And I for thee, my child; for thy sisters too I shed a tear.

AGAVE Ah! terribly was king Dionysus bringing this outrage on thy
house. 

CADMUS Yea, for he suffered insults dire from you, his name receiving
no meed of honour in Thebes. 

AGAVE Farewell, father mine! 

CADMUS Farewell, my hapless daughter and yet thou scarce canst reach
that bourn. 

AGAVE Oh! lead me, guide me to the place where I shall find my sisters,
sharers in my exile to their sorrow! Oh! to reach a spot where cursed
Cithaeron ne'er shall see me more nor I Cithaeron with mine eyes;
where no memorial of the thyrsus is set up! Be they to other Bacchantes
dear! 

CHORUS Many are the forms the heavenly will assumes, and many a thing
the gods fulfil contrary to all hope; that which was expected is not
brought to pass, while for the unlooked-for Heaven finds out a way.
E'en such hath been the issue here.  (Exeunt OMNES.)  

THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the great cave of the CYCLOPS at the foot of Mount Aetna. SILENUS
enters. He has a rake with him, with which he cleans up the ground
in front of the cave as he soliloquizes.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

SILENUS O Bromius, unnumbered are the toils I bear because of thee,
no less now than when I was young and hale; first, when thou wert
driven mad by Hera and didst leave the mountain nymphs, thy nurses;
next, when in battle with earth-born spearmen I stood beside thee
on the right as squire, and slew Enceladus, smiting him full in the
middle of his targe with my spear. Come, though, let me see; must
I confess 'twas all a dream? No, by Zeus! since I really showed his
spoils to the Bacchic god. And now am I enduring to the full a toil
still worse than those. For when Hera sent forth a race of Tyrrhene
pirates against thee, that thou mightest be smuggled far away, I,
as soon as the news reached me, sailed in quest of thee with my children;
and, taking the helm myself, I stood on the end of the stern and steered
our trim craft; and my sons, sitting at the oars, made the grey billows
froth and foam as they sought thee, my liege, But just as we had come
nigh Malea in our course, an east wind blew upon the ship and drove
us hither to the rock of Aetna, where in lonely caverns dwell the
one-eyed children of ocean's god, the murdering Cyclopes. Captured
by one of them we are slaves in his house; Polyphemus they call him
whom we serve; and instead of Bacchic revelry we are herding a godless
Cyclops's flocks; and so it is my children, striplings as they are,
tend the young thereof on the edge of the downs; while my appointed
task is to stay here and fill the troughs and sweep out the cave,
or wait upon the ungodly Cyclops at his impious feasts. His orders
now compel obedience; I have to scrape out his house with the rake
you see, so as to receive the Cyclops, my absent master, and his sheep
in clean caverns. 

But already I see my children driving their browsing flocks towards
me. 

What means this? is the beat of feet in the Sicinnis dance the same
to you now as when ye attended the Bacchic god in his revelries and
made your way with dainty steps to the music of lyres to the halls
of Althaea?  (The CHORUS OF SATYRS enters, driving a flock of goats
and sheep. Servants follow them.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Offspring of well-bred sires and dams, pray whither wilt thou be
gone from me to the rocks? Hast thou not here a gentle breeze, and
grass to browse, and water from the eddying stream set near the cave
in troughs? and are not thy young ones bleating for thee? Pst! pst!
wilt thou not browse here, here on the dewy slope? Ho! ho ere long
will I cast a stone at thee. Away, away! O horned one, to the fold-keeper
of the Cyclops, the country-ranging shepherd. 

(antistrophe)

Loosen thy bursting udder; welcome to thy teats the kids, whom thou
leavest in the lambkins' pens. Those little bleating kids, asleep
the livelong day, miss thee; wilt then leave at last the rich grass
pastures on the peaks of Aetna and enter the fold?... 

(epode)

Here we have no Bromian god; no dances here, or Bacchantes thyrsus-bearing;
no roll of drums, or drops of sparkling wine by gurgling founts; nor
is it now with Nymphs in Nysa I sing a song of Bacchus, Bacchus! to
the queen of love, in quest of whom I once sped on with Bacchantes,
white of foot. Dear friend, dear Bacchic god, whither art roaming
alone, waving thy auburn locks, while I, thy minister, do service
to the one-eyed Cyclops, a slave and wanderer I, clad in this wretched
goat-skin dress, severed from thy love? 

SILENUS Hush, children! and bid our servants fold the flocks in the
rock-roofed cavern. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS  (to Servants) Away!  (To SILENUS)  But prithee,
why such haste, father? 

SILENUS I see the hull of a ship from Hellas at the shore, and men,
that wield the oar, on their way to this cave with some chieftain.
About their necks they carry empty vessels and pitchers for water;
they are in want of food. Luckless strangers! who can they be? They
know not what manner of man our master Polyphemus is, to have set
foot here in his cheerless abode and come to the jaws of the cannibal
Cyclops in an evil hour. But hold ye your peace, that we may inquire
whence they come to the peak of Sicilian Aetna.  (ODYSSEUS and his
companions enter. They carry baskets for provisions and water jars.)

ODYSSEUS Pray tell us, sirs, of some river-spring whence we might
draw a draught to slake our thirst, or of someone willing to sell
victuals to mariners in need. 

Why, what is this? We seem to have chanced upon a city of the Bromian
god; here by the caves I see a group of Satyrs. To the eldest first
I bid "All hail! 

SILENUS All hail, sir! tell me who thou art, and name thy country.

ODYSSEUS Odysseus of Ithaca, king of the Cephallenians' land.

SILENUS I know him for a prating knave, one of Sisyphus' shrewd offspring.

ODYSSEUS I am the man; abuse me not. 

SILENUS Whence hast thou sailed hither to Sicily? 

ODYSSEUS From Ilium and the toils of Troy. 

SILENUS How was that? didst thou not know the passage to thy native
land? 

ODYSSEUS Tempestuous winds drove me hither against my will.

SILENUS God wot! thou art in the same plight as I am. 

ODYSSEUS Why, wert thou too drifted hither against thy will?

SILENUS I was, as I pursued the pirates who carried Bromius off.

ODYSSEUS What land is this and who are its inhabitants?

SILENUS This is mount Aetna, the highest point in Sicily.

ODYSSEUS But where are the city-walls and ramparts? 

SILENUS There are none; the headlands, sir, are void of men.

ODYSSEUS Who then possess the land? the race of wild creatures?

SILENUS The Cyclopes, who have caves, not roofed houses.

ODYSSEUS Obedient unto whom? or is the power in the people's hands?

SILENUS They are rovers; no man obeys another in anything.

ODYSSEUS Do they sow Demeter's grain, or on what do they live?

SILENUS On milk and cheese and flesh of sheep. 

ODYSSEUS Have they the drink of Bromius, the juice of the vine?

SILENUS No indeed! and thus it is a joyless land they dwell in.

ODYSSEUS Are they hospitable and reverent towards strangers?

SILENUS Strangers, they say, supply the daintiest meat.

ODYSSEUS What, do they delight in killing men and eating them?

SILENUS No one has ever arrived here without being butchered.

ODYSSEUS Where is the Cyclops himself? inside his dwelling?

SILENUS He is gone hunting wild beasts with hounds on Aetna.

ODYSSEUS Dost know then what to do, that we may be gone from the
land? 

SILENUS Not I, Odysseus; but I would do anything for thee.

ODYSSEUS Sell us food, of which we are in need. 

SILENUS There is nothing but flesh, as I said. 

ODYSSEUS Well, even that is a pleasant preventive of hunger.

SILENUS And there is cheese curdled with fig-juice, and the milk
of kine. 

ODYSSEUS Bring them out; a man should see his purchases.

SILENUS But tell me, how much gold wilt thou give me in exchange?

ODYSSEUS No gold bring I, but Dionysus' drink. 

SILENUS  (joyfully) Most welcome words! I have long been wanting
that. 

ODYSSEUS Yes, it was Maron, the god's son, who gave me a draught.

SILENUS What! Maron whom once I dandled in these arms? 

ODYSSEUS The son of the Bacchic god, that thou mayst learn more certainly.

SILENUS Is it inside the ship, or hast thou it with thee?

ODYSSEUS This, as thou seest, is the skin that holds it, old sir.

SILENUS Why, that would not give me so much as a mouthful.

ODYSSEUS This, and twice as much again as will run from the skin.

SILENUS Fair the rill thou speakest of, delicious to me.

ODYSSEUS Shall I let thee taste the wine unmixed, to start with?

SILENUS A reasonable offer; for of a truth a taste invites the purchase.

ODYSSEUS Well, I haul about a cup as well as the skin. 

SILENUS Come, let it gurgle in, that I may revive my memory by a
pull at it. 

ODYSSEUS  (pouring) There then! 

SILENUS  (smelling it) Ye gods! what a delicious scent it has!

ODYSSEUS What! didst thou see it? 

SILENUS No, i' faith, but I smell it. 

ODYSSEUS Taste it then, that thy approval may not stop at words.

SILENUS  (taking a drink) Zounds! Bacchus is inviting me to dance;
ha! ha! 

ODYSSEUS Did it not gurgle finely down thy throttle? 

SILENUS Aye that it did, to the ends of my fingers. 

ODYSSEUS Well, we will give thee money besides. 

SILENUS Only undo the skin, and never mind the money. 

ODYSSEUS Bring out the cheeses then and lambs. 

SILENUS I will do so, with small thought of any master. For let me
have a single cup of that and I would turn madman, giving in exchange
for it the flocks of every Cyclops and then throwing myself into the
sea from the Leucadian rock, once I have been well drunk and smoothed
out my wrinkled brow. For if a man rejoice not in his drinking, he
is mad; for in drinking it's possible for this to stand up straight,
and then to fondle breasts, and to caress well tended locks, and there
is dancing withal, and oblivion of woe. Shall not I then purchase
so rare a drink, bidding the senseless Cyclops and his central eye
go hang?  (SILENUS goes into the cave.)  

LEADER Hearken, Odysseus, let us hold some converse with thee.

ODYSSEUS Well, do so; ours is a meeting of friends. 

LEADER Did you take Troy and capture the famous Helen? 

ODYSSEUS Aye, and we destroyed the whole family of Priam.

LEADER After capturing your blooming prize, were all of you in turn
her lovers? for she likes variety in husbands; the traitress! the
sight of a man with embroidered breeches on his legs and a golden
chain about his neck so fluttered her, that she left Menelaus, her
excellent little husband. Would there had never been a race of women
born into the world at all, unles it were for me alone! 

SILENUS  (reappearing with food) Lo! I bring you fat food from the
flocks, king Odysseus, the young of bleating sheep and cheeses of
curdled milk without stint. Carry them away with you and begone from
the cave at once, after giving me a drink of merry grape-juice in
exchange. 

LEADER Alack! yonder comes the Cyclops; what shall we do?

ODYSSEUS Then truly are we lost, old sir! whither must we fly?

SILENUS Inside this rock, for there ye may conceal yourselves.

ODYSSEUS Dangerous advice of thine, to run into the net!

SILENUS No danger; there are ways of escape in plenty in the rock.

ODYSSEUS No, never that; for surely Troy will groan and loudly too,
if we flee from a single man, when I have oft withstood with my shield
a countless host of Phrygians. Nay, if die we must, we will die a
noble death; or, if we live, we will maintain our old renown at least
with credit.  (The CYCLOPS enters as SILENUS goes into the cave. The
CYCLOPS, not noticing ODYSSEUS and his companions, addresses the CHORUS
in anger.)  

CYCLOPS A light here! hold it up! what is this? what means this idleness,
your Bacchic revelry? Here have we no Dionysus, nor clash of brass,
nor roll of drums. Pray, how is it with my newly-born lambs in the
caves? are they at the teat, running close to the side of their dams?
Is the full amount of milk for cheeses milked out in baskets of rushes?
How now? what say you? One of ye will soon be shedding tears from
the weight of my club; look up, not down. 

LEADER There! my head is bent back till I see Zeus himself; I behold
both the stars and Orion. 

CYCLOPS Is my breakfast quite ready? 

LEADER 'Tis laid; be thy throat only ready. 

CYCLOPS Are, the bowls too full of milk? 

LEADER Aye, so that thou canst swill off a whole hogshead, so it
please thee. 

CYCLOPS Sheep's milk or cows' milk or a mixture of both?

LEADER Whichever thou wilt; don't swallow me, that's all.

CYCLOPS Not I; for you would start kicking in the pit of my stomach
and kill me by your antics.  (Catching sight Of ODYSSEUS and his followers)
Ha! what is this crowd I see near the folds? Some pirates or robbers
have put in here.  (SILENUS comes out of the cave. He has made himself
appear as though he had just suffered a terrible beating.)  Yes, I
really see the lambs from my caves tied up there with twisted osiers,
cheese-presses scattered about, and old Silenus with his bald pate
all swollen with blows. 

SILENUS Oh! oh! poor wretch that I am, pounded to a fever.

CYCLOPS By whom? who has been pounding thy head, old sirrah?

SILENUS These are the culprits, Cyclops, all because I refused to
let them plunder thee. 

CYCLOPS Did they not know I was a god and sprung from gods?

SILENUS That was what I told them, but they persisted in plundering
thy goods, and, in spite of my efforts, they actually began to eat
the cheese and carry off the lambs; and they said they would tie thee
in a three-cubit pillory and tear out thy bowels by force at thy navel,
and flay thy back thoroughly with the scourge; and then, after binding
thee, fling thy carcase down among the benches of their ship to sell
to someone for heaving up stones, or else throw thee into a mill.

CYCLOPS Oh, indeed! Be off then and sharpen my cleavers at once;
heap high the faggots and light them; for they shall be slain forthwith
and fill this maw of mine, what time I pick my feast hot from the
coals, waiting not for carvers, and fish up the rest from the cauldron
boiled and sodden; for I have had my fill of mountain-fare and sated
myself with banquets of lions and stags, but 'tis long I have been
without human flesh. 

SILENUS Truly, master, a change like this is all the sweeter after
everyday fare; for just of late there have been no fresh arrivals
of strangers at these caves. 

ODYSSEUS Hear the strangers too in turn, Cyclops. We had come near
the cave from our ship, wishing to procure provisions by purchase,
when this fellow sold us the lambs and handed them over for a stoup
of wine to drink himself, a voluntary act on both sides, there was
no violence employed at all. No, there is not a particle of truth
in the story he tells; now that he has been caught selling thy property
behind thy back. 

SILENUS I? Perdition catch thee! 

ODYSSEUS If I am lying, yes. 

SILENUS  (in agitation) O Cyclops, by thy sire Poseidon, by mighty
Triton and Nereus, by Calypso and the daughters of Nereus, by the
sacred billows and all the race of fishes! I swear to thee, most noble
sir, dear little Cyclops, master mine, it is not I who sell thy goods
to strangers, else may these children, dearly as I love them, come
to an evil end. 

LEADER Keep that for thyself; with my own eyes I saw thee sell the
goods to the strangers; and if I lie, perdition catch my sire! but
injure not the strangers. 

CYCLOPS Ye lie; for my part I put more faith in him than Rhadamanthus,
declaring him more just. But I have some questions to ask. Whence
sailed ye, strangers? of what country are you? what city was it nursed
your childhood? 

ODYSSEUS We are Ithacans by birth, and have been driven from our
course by the winds of the sea on our way from Ilium, after sacking
its citadel. 

CYCLOPS Are ye the men who visited on Ilium, that bordereth on Scamander's
wave, the rape of Helen, worst of women? 

ODYSSEUS We are; that was the fearful labour we endured.

CYCLOPS A sorry expedition yours, to have sailed to the land of Phrygia
for the sake of one woman 

ODYSSEUS It was a god's doing; blame not any son of man. But thee
do we implore, most noble son of Ocean's god, speaking as free-born
men; be not so cruel as to slay thy friends on their coming to thy
cave, nor regard us as food for thy jaws, an impious meal; for we
preserved thy sire, O king, in possession of his temple-seats deep
in the nooks of Hellas; and the sacred port of Taenarus and Malea's
furthest coves remain unharmed; and Sunium's rock, the silver-veined,
sacred to Zeus-born Athena, still is safe, and Geraestus, the harbour
of refuge; and we did not permit Phrygians to put such an intolerable
reproach on Hellas. Now in these things thou too hast a share, for
thou dwellest in a corner of the land of Hellas beneath Aetna's fire-streaming
rock; and although thou turn from arguments, still it is a custom
amongst mortal men to receive shipwrecked sailors as their suppliants
and show them hospitality and help them with raiment; not that these
should fill thy jaws and belly, their limbs transfixed with spits
for piercing ox-flesh. The land of Priam hath emptied Hellas quite
enough, drinking the blood of many whom the spear laid low, with the
ruin it has brought on widowed wives, on aged childless dames, and
hoary-headed sires; and if thou roast and consume the remnant,-a meal
thou wilt rue,-why, where shall one turn? Nay, be persuaded by me,
Cyclops; forego thy ravenous greed and choose piety rather than wickedness;
for on many a man ere now unrighteous gains have brought down retribution.

SILENUS I will give thee a word of advice! as for his flesh, leave
not a morsel of it, and if thou eat his tongue, Cyclops, thou wilt
become a monstrous clever talker. 

CYCLOPS Wealth, manikin, is the god for the wise; all else is mere
vaunting and fine words. Plague take the headlands by the sea, on
which my father seats himself! Why hast thou put forward these arguments?
I shudder not at Zeus's thunder, nor know I wherein Zeus is a mightier
god than I, stranger; what is more, I reck not of him; my reasons
hear. When he pours down the rain from above, here in this rock in
quarters snug, feasting on roast calf's flesh or some wild game and
moistening well my up-turned paunch with deep draughts from a tub
of milk, I rival the thunder-claps of Zeus with my artillery; and
when the north wind blows from Thrace and sheddeth snow, I wrap my
carcase in the hides of beasts and light a fire, and what care I for
snow? The earth perforce, whether she like it or not, produces grass
and fattens my flocks, which I sacrifice to no one save myself and
this belly, the greatest of deities; but to the gods, not I! For surely
to eat and drink one's fill from day to day and give oneself no grief
at all, this is the king of gods for your wise man, but lawgivers
go hang, chequering, as they do, the life of man! And so I will not
cease from indulging myself by devouring thee; and thou shalt receive
this stranger's gift, that I may be free of blame,-fire and my father's
element yonder, and a cauldron to hold thy flesh and boil it nicely
in collops. So in with you, that ye may feast me well, standing round
the altar to honour the cavern's god.  (The CYCLOPS goes into his
cave, driving ODYSSEUS' men before him.)  

ODYSSEUS Alas! escaped from the troubles of Troy and the sea, my
barque now strands upon the whim and forbidding heart of this savage.
O Pallas, mistress mine, goddess-daughter of Zeus, help me, help me
now; for I am come to toils and depths of peril worse than all at
Ilium; and thou, O Zeus, the stranger's god, who hast thy dwelling
'mid the radiant stars, behold these things; for, if thou regard them
not, in vain art thou esteemed the great god Zeus, though but a thing
of naught.  (He follows the CYCLOPS reluctantly. SILENUS also goes
in.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Ope wide the portal of thy gaping throat, Cyclops;
for strangers' limbs, both boiled and grilled, are ready from off
the coals for the to gnaw and tear and mince up small, reclining in
thy shaggy goat-skin coat. 

Relinquish not thy meal for me; keep that boat for thyself alone.
Avaunt this cave! avaunt the burnt-offerings, which the godless Cyclops
offers on Aetna's altars, exulting in meals on strangers' flesh!

Oh! the ruthless monster! to sacrifice his guests at his own hearth,
the suppliants of his halls, cleaving and tearing and serving up to
his loathsome teeth a feast of human flesh, hot from the coals.

ODYSSEUS  (reappearing with a look of horror) O Zeus! what can I
say after the hideous sights I have seen inside the cave, things past
belief, resembling more the tales men tell than aught they do?

LEADER OF THE CHORUS What news, Odysseus? has the Cyclops, most godless
monster, been feasting on thy dear comrades? 

ODYSSEUS Aye, he singled out a pair, on whom the flesh was fattest
and in best condition, and took them up in his hand to weigh.

LEADER How went it with you then, poor wretch? 

ODYSSEUS When we had entered yonder rocky abode, he lighted first
a fire, throwing logs of towering oak upon his spacious hearth, enough
for three wagons to carry as their load; next, close by the blazing
flame, he placed his couch of pine-boughs laid upon the floor, and
filled a bowl of some ten firkins, pouring white milk thereinto, after
he had milked his kine; and by his side he put a can of ivy-wood,
whose breadth was three cubits and its depth four maybe; next he set
his brazen pot a-boiling on the fire, spits too he set beside him,
fashioned of the branches of thorn, their points hardened in the fire
and the rest of them trimmed with the hatchet, and the blood-bowls
of Aetna for the axe's edge. Now when that hell-cook, god-detested,
had everything quite ready, he caught up a pair of my companions and
proceeded deliberately to cut the throat of one of them over the yawning
brazen pot; but the other he clutched by the tendon of his heel, and,
striking him against a sharp point of rocky stone, dashed out his
brains; then, after hacking the fleshy parts with glutton cleaver,
he set to grilling them, but the limbs he threw into his cauldron
to seethe. And I, poor wretch, drew near with streaming eyes and waited
on the Cyclops; but the others kept cowering like frightened birds
in crannies of the rock, and the blood forsook their skin. Anon, when
he had gorged himself upon my comrades' flesh and had fallen on his
back, breathing heavily, there came a sudden inspiration to me. I
filled a cup of this Maronian wine and offered him a draught, saying,
"Cyclops, son of Ocean's god, see here what heavenly drink the grapes
of Hellas yield, glad gift of Dionysus." He, glutted with his shameless
meal, took and drained it at one draught, and, lifting up his hand,
he thanked me thus "Dearest to me of all my guests! fair the drink
thou givest me to crown so fair a feast." Now when I saw his delight,
I gave him another cup, knowing the wine would make him rue it, and
he would soon be paying the penalty. Then he set to singing; but I
kept filling bumper after bumper and heating him with drink. So there
he is singing discordantly amid the weeping of my fellow-sailors,
and the cave re-echoes; but I have made my way out quietly and would
fain save thee and myself, if thou wilt. Tell me then, is it your
wish, or is it not, to fly from this unsocial wretch and take up your
abode with Naiad nymphs in the halls of the Bacchic god? Thy father
within approves this scheme; but there! he is powerless, getting all
he can out of his liquor; his wings are snared by the cup as if he
had flown against bird-lime, and he is fuddled; but thou art young
and lusty; so save thyself with my help and regain thy old friend
Dionysus, so little like the Cyclops. 

LEADER Best of friends, would we might see that day, escaping the
godless Cyclops! 

ODYSSEUS Hear then how I will requite this vile monster and rescue
you from thraldom. 

LEADER Tell me how; no note of Asiatic lyre would sound more sweetly
in our ears than news of the Cyclops' death. 

ODYSSEUS Delighted with this liquor of the Bacchic god, he fain would
go a-reveling with his brethren. 

LEADER I understand; thy purpose is to seize and slay him in the
thickets when clone, or push him down a precipice. 

ODYSSEUS Not at all; my plan is fraught with subtlety. 

LEADER What then? Truly we have long heard of thy cleverness.

ODYSSEUS I mean to keep him from this revel, saying he must not give
this drink to his brethren but keep it for himself alone and lead
a happy life. Then when he falls asleep, o'ermastered by the Bacchic
god, I will put a point with this sword of mine to an olive-branch
I saw lying in the cave, and will set it on fire; and when I see it
well alight, I will lift the heated brand, and, thrusting it full
in the Cyclops' eye, melt out his sight with its blaze; and, as when
a man in fitting the timbers of a ship makes his auger spin to and
fro with a double strap, so will I make the brand revolve in the eye,
that gives the Cyclops light and will scorch up the pupil thereof.

LEADER Ho! ho! how glad I feel! wild with joy at the contrivance!

ODYSSEUS That done, I will embark thee and those thou lovest with
old Silenus in the deep hold of my black ship, my ship with double
banks of oars, and carry you away from this land. 

LEADER Well, can I too lay hold of the blinding brand, as though
the god's libation had been poured? for I would fain have a share
in this offering of blood. 

ODYSSEUS Indeed thou must, for the brand is large, and thou must
help hold it. 

LEADER How lightly would I lift the load of e'en a hundred wains,
if that will help us to grub out the eye of the doomed Cyclops, like
a wasp's nest. 

ODYSSEUS Hush! for now thou knowest my plot in full, and when I bid
you, obey the author of it; for I am not the man to desert my friends
inside the cave and save myself alone. And yet I might escape; I am
clear of the cavern's depths already; but no! to desert the friends
with whom I journeyed hither and only save myself is not a righteous
course.  (He re-enters the cave.)  

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS  (singing) Come, who will be the first and who
the next to him upon the list to grip the handle of the brand, and,
thrusting it into the Cyclops' eye, gouge out the light thereof?

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS  (singing) Hush! hush! Behold the drunkard leaves
his rocky home, trolling loud some hideous lay, a clumsy tuneless
clown, whom tears await. Come, let us give this boor a lesson in revelry.
Ere long will he be blind at any rate. 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS  (singing) Happy he who plays the Bacchanal amid
the precious streams distilled from grapes, stretched at full length
for a revel, his arm around the friend he loves, and some fair dainty
damsel on his couch, his hair perfumed with nard and glossy, the while
he calls, "Oh! who will ope the door for me?"  (The CYCLOPS enters.
He is obviously drunk.)  

CYCLOPS  (singing) Ha! ha! full of wine and merry with a feast's
good cheer am I, my hold freighted like a merchant-ship up to my belly's
very top. This turf graciously invites me to seek my brother Cyclopes
for revel in the spring-tide. Come, stranger, bring the wine-skin
hither and hand it over to me. 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS  (singing) Forth from the house its fair lord
comes, casting his fair glance round him. We have someone to befriend
us. A hostile brand is awaiting thee, no tender bride in dewy grot.
No single colour will those garlands have, that soon shall cling so
close about thy brow. 

ODYSSEUS (returning with the wine-skin. He is followed by SILENUS,
who is also drunk.)  Hearken, Cyclops; for I am well versed in the
ways of Bacchus, whom I have given thee to drink. 

CYCLOPS And who is Bacchus? some reputed god? 

ODYSSEUS The greatest god men know to cheer their life.

CYCLOPS I like his after-taste at any rate. 

ODYSSEUS This is the kind of god he is; he harmeth no man.

CYCLOPS But how does a god like being housed in a wine-skin?

ODYSSEUS Put him where one may, he is content there. 

CYCLOPS It is not right that gods should be clad in leather.

ODYSSEUS What of that, provided he please thee? does the leather
hurt thee? 

CYCLOPS I hate the wine-skin, but the liquor we have here I love.

ODYSSEUS Stay, then, Cyclops; drink and be merry. 

CYCLOPS Must I not give my brethren a share in this liquor?

ODYSSEUS No, keep it thyself and thou wilt appear of more honour.

CYCLOPS Give it my friends and I shall appear of more use.

ODYSSEUS Revelling is apt to end in blows, abuse, and strife.

CYCLOPS I may be drunk, but no man will lay hands on me for all that.

ODYSSEUS Better stay at home, my friend, after a carouse.

CYCLOPS Who loves not revelling then is but a simpleton.

ODYSSEUS But whoso stays at home, when drunk, is wise. 

CYCLOPS What shall we do, Silenus? art minded to stay? 

SILENUS That I am; for what need have we of others to share our drink,
Cyclops? 

CYCLOPS Well, truly the turf is soft as down with its fresh flowering
plants. 

SILENUS  (seating himself) Aye, and 'tis pleasant drinking in the
warm sunshine. Come, let me see thee stretch thy carcase on the ground.

CYCLOPS  (sitting down) There then Why art thou putting the mixing-bowl
behind me? 

SILENUS That no one passing by may upset it. 

CYCLOPS Nay, but thy purpose is to drink upon the sly; set it between
us.  (To ODYSSEUS)  Now tell me, stranger, by what name to call thee.
(SILENUS is drinking steadily and stealthily.)  

ODYSSEUS Noman. What boon shall I receive of thee to earn my thanks?

CYCLOPS I will feast on thee last, after all thy comrades.

ODYSSEUS Fair indeed the honour thou bestowest on thy guest, sir
Cyclops! 

CYCLOPS  (turning suddenly to SILENUS) Ho, sirrah! what art thou
about? taking a stealthy pull at the wine? 

SILENUS No, but it kissed me for my good looks. 

CYCLOPS Thou shalt smart, if thou kiss the wine when it kisses not
thee. 

SILENUS Oh! but it did, for it says it is in love with my handsome
face. 

CYCLOPS  (holding out his cup) Pour in; only give me my cup full.

SILENUS H'm! how is it mixed? just let me make sure.  (Takes another
pull.)  

CYCLOPS Perdition! give it me at once. 

SILENUS Oh, no! I really cannot, till I see thee with a crown on,
and have another taste myself. 

CYCLOPS My cup-bearer is a cheat. 

SILENUS No really, but the wine is so luscious. Thou must wipe thy
lips, though, to get a draught. 

CYCLOPS There! my lips and beard are clean now. 

SILENUS Bend thine elbow gracefully, and then quaff thy cup, as thou
seest me do, and as now thou seest me not.  (Burying his face in his
cup)  

CYCLOPS Aha! what next? 

SILENUS I drunk it off at a draught with much pleasure.

CYCLOPS Stranger, take the skin thyself and be my cup-bearer.

ODYSSEUS Well, at any rate the grape is no stranger to my hand.

CYCLOPS Come, pour it in. 

ODYSSEUS In it goes! keep silence, that is all. 

CYCLOPS A difficult task when a man is deep in his cups.

ODYSSEUS Here, take and drink it off; leave none. Thou must be silent
and only give in when the liquor does. 

CYCLOPS God wot! it is a clever stock that bears the grape.

ODYSSEUS Aye, and if thou but swallow plenty of it after a plentiful
meal, moistening thy belly till its thirst is gone, it will throw
thee into slumber; but if thou leave aught behind, the Bacchic god
will parch thee for it. 

CYCLOPS Ha! ha! what a trouble it was getting out! This is pleasure
unalloyed; earth and sky seem whirling round together; I see the throne
of Zeus and all the godhead's majesty. Kiss thee! no! There are the
Graces trying to tempt me. I shall rest well enough with my Ganymede
here; yea, by the Graces, right fairly; for I like lads better than
the wenches. 

SILENUS What! Cyclops, am I Ganymede, Zeus's minion? 

CYCLOPS  (attempting to carry him into the cave) To be sure, Ganymede
whom I am carrying off from the halls of Dardanus. 

SILENUS I am undone, my children; outrageous treatment waits me.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Dost find fault with thy lover? dost scorn him
in his cups? 

SILENUS Woe is me! most bitter shall I find the wine ere long.  (SILENUS
is dragged into the cave by the CYCLOPS.)  

ODYSSEUS Up now, children of Dionysus, sons of a noble sire, soon
will yon creature in the cave, relaxed in slumber as ye see him, spew
from his shameless maw the meat. Already the brand inside his lair
is vomiting cloud of smoke; and the only reason we prepared it was
to burn the Cyclops' eye; so mind thou quit thee like a man.

LEADER I will have a spirit as of rock or adamant; but go inside,
before my father suffers any shameful treatment; for here thou hast
things ready. 

ODYSSEUS O Hephaestus, lord of Aetna, rid thyself for once and all
of a troublesome neighbour by burning his bright eye out. Come, Sleep,
as well, offspring of sable Night, come with all thy power on the
monster god-detested; and never after Troy's most glorious toils destroy
Odysseus and his crew by the hands of one who recketh naught of God
or man; else roust we reckon Chance a goddess, and Heaven's will inferior
to hers.  (ODYSSEUS re-enters the cave.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Tightly the pincers shall grip the neck of him
who feasts upon his guests; for soon will he lose the light of his
eye by fire; already the brand, a tree's huge limb, lurks amid the
embers charred. Oh! come ye then and work his doom, pluck out the
maddened Cyclops' eye, that he may rue his drinking. And I too fain
would leave the Cyclops' lonely land and see king Bromius, ivy-crowned,
the god I sorely miss. Ah! shall I ever come to that? 

ODYSSEUS  (leaving the cave cautiously) Silence, ye cattle! I adjure
you; close your lips; make not a sound I'll not let a man of you so
much as breathe or wink or clear his throat, that yon pest awake not,
until the sight in the Cyclops' eye has passed through the fiery ordeal.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Silent we stand with bated breath.

ODYSSEUS In then, and mind your fingers grip the brand, for it is
splendidly red-hot. 

LEADER Thyself ordain who first must seize the blazing bar and burn
the Cyclops' eye out, that we may share alike whate'er betides.

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Standing where I am before the door, I am too far
off to thrust the fire into his eye. 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS I have just gone lame. 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Why, then, thou art in the same plight as I; for
somehow or other I sprained my ankle, standing still. 

ODYSSEUS Sprained thy ankle, standing still? 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Yes, and my eyes are full of dust or ashes from
somewhere or other. 

ODYSSEUS These are sorry fellows, worthless as allies. 

LEADER Because I feel for my back and spine, and express no wish
to have my teeth knocked out, I am a coward, am I? Well, but I know
a spell of Orpheus, a most excellent one, to make the brand enter
his skull of its own accord, and set alight the one-eyed son of Earth.

ODYSSEUS Long since I knew thou wert by nature such an one, and now
I know it better; I must employ my own friends; but, though thou bring
no active aid, cheer us on at any rate, that I may find my friends
emboldened by thy encouragement.  (ODYSSEUS goes back into the cave.)

LEADER That will I do; the Carian shall run the risk for us; and
as far as encouragement goes, let the Cyclops smoulder. 

CHORUS  (singing) What ho! my gallants, thrust away, make haste and
burn his eyebrow off, the monster's guest-devouring. Oh! singe and
scorch the shepherd of Aetna; twirl the brand and drag it round and
be careful lest in his agony he treat thee to some wantonness.

CYCLOPS  (bellowing in the cave) Oh! oh! my once bright eye is burnt
to cinders now. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Sweet indeed the triumph-song; pray sing it
to us, Cyclops. 

CYCLOPS  (from within) Oh! oh! once more; what outrage on me and
what ruin! But never shall ye escape this rocky cave unpunished, ye
worthless creatures; for will stand in the entrance of the cleft and
fit my hands into it thus.  (Staggering to the entrance)

LEADER Why dost thou cry out, Cyclops? 

CYCLOPS I am undone. 

LEADER Thou art indeed a sorry sight. 

CYCLOPS Aye, and a sad one, too. 

LEADER Didst fall among the coals in a drunken fit? 

CYCLOPS Noman has undone me, 

LEADER Then there is no one hurting thee after all. 

CYCLOPS Noman is blinding me. 

LEADER Then art thou not blind. 

CYCLOPS As blind as thou, forsooth. 

LEADER How, pray, could no man have made thee blind? 

CYCLOPS Thou mockest me; but where is this Noman? 

LEADER Nowhere, Cyclops. 

CYCLOPS It was the stranger, vile wretch! who proved my ruin, that
thou mayst understand rightly, by swilling me with the liquor he gave
me. 

LEADER Ah! wine is a terrible foe, hard to wrestle with.

CYCLOPS Tell me, I adjure thee, have they escaped or are they still
within?  (During the following lines, ODYSSEUS and his men slip by
the CYCLOPS, despite his efforts to stop them.)  

LEADER Here they are ranged in silence, taking the rock to screen
them. 

CYCLOPS On which side? 

LEADER On thy right. 

CYCLOPS Where? 

LEADER Close against the rock. Hast caught them? 

CYCLOPS Trouble on trouble! I have run my skull against the rock
and cracked it 

LEADER Aye, and they are escaping thee. 

CYCLOPS This way, was it not? 'Twas this way thou saidst.

LEADER No, not this way. 

CYCLOPS Which then? 

LEADER They are getting round thee on the left. 

CYCLOPS Alas! I am being mocked; ye jeer me in my evil plight.

LEADER They are no longer there; but facing thee that stranger stands.

CYCLOPS Master of villainy, where, oh! where art thou? 

ODYSSEUS Some way from thee I am keeping careful guard over the person
of Odysseus. 

CYCLOPS What, a new name! hast changed thine? 

ODYSSEUS Yes, Odysseus, the name my father gave me. But thou wert
doomed to pay for thy unholy feast; for I should have seen Troy burned
to but sorry purpose, unless I had avenged on thee the slaughter of
my comrades. 

CYCLOPS Woe is me! 'tis an old oracle coming true; yes, it said I
should have my eye put out by thee on thy way home from Troy; but
it likewise foretold that thou wouldst surely pay for this, tossing
on the sea for many day. 

ODYSSEUS Go hang! E'en as I say, so have I done. And now will I get
me to the beach and start my hollow ship across the sea of Sicily
to the land of my fathers. 

CYCLOPS Thou shalt not; I will break a boulder off this rock and
crush thee, crew and all, beneath my throw. Blind though I be, I will
climb the hill, mounting through yonder tunnel. 

LEADER As for us, henceforth will we be the servants of Bacchus,
sharing the voyage of this hero Odysseus. 

THEEND

 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the hut of the PEASANT, in the country on the borders of Argolis.
It is just before sunrise. The PEASANT is discovered alone.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

PEASANT O Argos, ancient land, and streams of Inachus, whence on
a day king Agamemnon sailed to the realm of Troy, carrying his warriors
aboard a thousand ships; and after he had slain Priam who was reigning
in Ilium and captured the famous city of Dardanus, he came hither
to Argos and has set up high on the temple-walls many a trophy, spoil
of the barbarians. Though all went well with him in Troy, yet was
he slain in his own palace by the guile of his wife Clytemnestra and
the hand of Aegisthus, son of Thyestes. So he died and left behind
him the ancient sceptre of Tantalus, and Aegisthus reigns in his stead,
with the daughter of Tyndareus, Agamemnon's queen, to wife. Now as
for those whom he left in his halls, when he sailed to Troy, his son
Orestes and his tender daughter Electra,-the boy Orestes, as he was
like to be slain by Aegisthus, his sire's old foster-father secretly
removed to the land of Phocis and gave to Strophius to bring up, but
the maid Electra abode in her father's house, and soon as she had
budded into maidenhood, came all the princes of Hellas asking her
hand in marriage. But Aegisthus kept her at home for fear she might
bear a son to some chieftain who would avenge Agamemnon, nor would
he betroth her unto any. But when e'en thus there seemed some room
for fear that she might bear some noble lord a child by stealth and
Aegisthus was minded to slay her, her mother, though she had a cruel
heart, yet rescued the maiden from his hand. For she could find excuses
for having slain her husband, but she feared the hatred she would
incur for her children's murder. Wherefore Aegisthus devised this
scheme; on Agamemnon's son who had escaped his realm by flight he
set a price to be paid to any who should slay him, while he gave Electra
to me in marriage, whose ancestors were citizens of Mycenae. It is
not that I blame myself for; my family was noble enough, though certainly
impoverished, and so my good birth suffers. By making for her this
weak alliance he thought he would have little to fear. For if some
man of high position had married her, he might have revived the vengeance
for Agamemnon's murder, which now is sleeping; in which case Aegisthus
would have paid the penalty. But Cypris is my witness that I have
ever respected her maidenhood; she is still as though unwed. Unworthy
as I am, honour forbids that I should so affront the daughter of a
better man. Yea, and I am sorry for Orestes, hapless youth, who is
called my kinsman, to think that he should ever return to Argos and
behold his sister's wretched marriage. And whoso counts me but a fool
for leaving a tender maid untouched when I have her in my house, to
him I say, he measures purity by the vicious standard of his own soul,
a standard like himself.  (ELECTRA enters from the hut, carrying a
water pitcher on her head. She is meanly clad.)  

ELECTRA O sable night, nurse of the golden stars! beneath thy pall
I go to fetch water from the brook with my pitcher poised upon my
head, not indeed because I am forced to this necessity, but that to
the gods I may display the affronts Aegisthus puts upon me, and to
the wide firmament pour out my lamentation for my sire. For my own
mother, the baleful daughter of Tyndareus, hath cast me forth from
her house to gratify her lord; for since she hath borne other children
to Aegisthus she puts me and Orestes on one side at home.

PEASANT Oh! why, poor maiden, dost thou toil so hard on my behalf,
thou that aforetime wert reared so daintily? why canst thou not forego
thy labour, as I bid thee? 

ELECTRA As a god's I count thy kindness to me, for in my distress
thou hast never made a mock at me. 'Tis rare fortune when mortals
find such healing balm for their cruel wounds as 'tis my lot to find
in thee. Wherefore I ought, though thou forbid me, to lighten thy
labours, as far as my strength allows, and share all burdens with
thee to ease thy load. Thou hast enough to do abroad; 'tis only right
that I should keep thy house in order. For when the toiler cometh
to his home from the field, it is pleasant to find all comfortable
in the house. 

PEASANT If such thy pleasure, go thy way; for, after all, the spring
is no great distance from my house. And at break of day I will drive
my steers to my glebe and sow my crop. For no idler, though he has
the gods' names ever on his lips, can gather a livelihood without
hard work.  (ELECTRA and the PEASANT go out. A moment later ORESTES
and PYLADES enter.)  

ORESTES Ah Pylades, I put thee first 'mongst men for thy love, thy
loyalty and friendliness to me; for thou alone of all my friends wouldst
still honour poor Orestes, in spite of the grievous plight whereto
I am reduced by Aegisthus, who with my accursed mother's aid slew
my sire. I am come from Apollo's mystic shrine to the soil of Argos,
without the knowledge of any, to avenge my father's death upon his
murderers. Last night went unto his tomb and wept thereon, cutting
off my hair as an offering and pouring o'er the grave the blood of
a sheep for sacrifice, unmarked by those who lord it o'er this land.
And now though I enter not the walled town, yet by coming to the borders
of the land I combine two objects; I can escape to another country
if any spy me out and recognize me, and at the same time seek my sister,
for I am told she is a maid no longer but is married and living here,
that I may meet her, and, after enlisting her aid in the deed of blood,
learn for certain what is happening in the town. Let us now, since
dawn is uplifting her radiant eye, step aside from this path. For
maybe some labouring man or serving maid will come in sight, of whom
we may inquire whether it is here that my sister hath her home. Lo!
yonder I see a servant bearing a full pitcher of water on her shaven
head; let us sit down and make inquiry of this bond-maid, if haply
we may glean some tidings of the matter which brought us hither, Pylades.
(They retire a little, as ELECTRA returns from the spring.)

ELECTRA  (chanting, strophe 1)

Bestir thy lagging feet, 'tis high time; on, on o'er thy path of
tears! ah misery! I am Agamemnon's daughter, she whom Clytemnestra,
hateful child of Tyndareus, bare; hapless Electra is the name my countrymen
call me. Ah me! for my cruel lot, my hateful existence! O my father
Agamemnon! in Hades art thou laid, butchered by thy wife and Aegisthus.
Come, raise with me that dirge once more; uplift the woful strain
that brings relief. 

(antistrophe 1)

On, on o'er thy path of tears! ah misery! And thou, poor brother,
in what city and house art thou a slave, leaving thy suffering sister
behind in the halls of our fathers to drain the cup of bitterness?
Oh! come, great Zeus, to set me free from this life of sorrow, and
to avenge my sire in the blood of his foes, bringing the wanderer
home to Argos. 

(strophe 2)

Take this pitcher from my head, put it down, that I may wake betimes,
while it is yet night, my lamentation for my sire, my doleful chant,
my dirge of death, for thee, my father in thy grave, which day by
day I do rehearse, rending my skin with my nails, and smiting on my
shaven head in mourning for thy death. Woe, woe! rend the cheek; like
a swan with clear loud note beside the brimming river calling to its
parent dear that lies a-dying in the meshes of the crafty net, so
I bewail thee, my hapless sire, 

(antistrophe 2)

After that last fatal bath of thine laid out most piteously in death.
Oh I the horror of that axe which hacked thee so cruelly, my sire
I oh! the bitter thought that prompted thy return from Troy! With
no garlands or victor's crowns did thy wife welcome thee, but with
his two-edged sword she made thee the sad sport of Aegisthus and kept
her treacherous paramour.  (The CHORUS OF ARGIVE COUNTRY-WOMEN enter.
The following lines between ELECTRA and the CHORUS are sung responsively.)

CHORUS (strophe)

O Electra, daughter of Agamemnon, to thy rustic cot I come, for a
messenger hath arrived, a highlander from Mycenae, one who lives on
milk, announcing that the Argives are proclaiming a sacrifice for
the third day from now, and all our maidens are to go to Hera's temple.

ELECTRA Kind friends, my heart is not set on festivity, nor do necklaces
of gold cause any flutter in my sorrowing bosom, nor will I stand
up with the maidens of Argos to beat my foot in the mazy dance. Tears
have been my meat day and night; ah misery! See my unkempt hair, my
tattered dress; are they fit for a princess, a daughter of Agamemnon,
or for Troy which once thought of my father as its captor?

CHORUS (antistrophe)

Mighty is the goddess; so come, and borrow of me broidered robes
for apparel and jewels of gold that add a further grace to beauty's
charms. Dost think to triumph o'er thy foes by tears, if thou honour
not the gods? 'Tis not by lamentation but by pious prayers to heaved
that thou, my daughter, wilt make fortune smile on thee.

ELECTRA No god hearkens to the voice of lost Electra, or heeds the
sacrifices offered by my father long ago. Ah woe for the dead! woe
for the living wanderer, who dwelleth in some foreign land, an outcast
and vagabond at a menial board, sprung though he is of a famous sire!
Myself, too, in a poor man's hut do dwell, wasting my soul with grief,
an exile from my father's halls, here by the scarred hill-side; while
my mother is wedded to a new husband in a marriage stained by blood.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Many a woe to Hellas and thy house did Helen,
thy mother's sister, cause. 

ELECTRA  (catching sight of ORESTES AND PYLADES) Ha! Friends, I break
off my lament; yonder are strangers just leaving the place of ambush
where they were couching, and making for the house. We must seek to
escape the villains by flying, thou along the path and I into my cottage.

ORESTES Stay, poor maid; fear no violence from me. 

ELECTRA O Phoebus Apollo I beseech thee spare my life. 

ORESTES Give me the lives of others more my foes than thou!

ELECTRA Begone! touch me not! thou hast no right to. 

ORESTES There is none I have a better right to touch. 

ELECTRA How is it then thou waylayest me, sword in hand, near my
house? 

ORESTES Wait and hear, and thou wilt soon agree with me

ELECTRA Here I stand; I am in thy power in any case, since thou art
the stronger. 

ORESTES I am come to thee with news of thy brother. 

ELECTRA O best of friends! is he alive or dead? 

ORESTES Alive; I would fain give thee my good news first.

ELECTRA God bless thee! in return for thy welcome tidings.

ORESTES I am prepared to share that blessing between us.

ELECTRA In what land is my poor brother spending his dreary exile?

ORESTES His ruined life does not conform to the customs of any one
city. 

ELECTRA Surely he does not want for daily bread? 

ORESTES Bread he has, but an exile is a helpless man at best.

ELECTRA What is this message thou hast brought from him?

ORESTES He asks, "Art thou alive? and if so, How art thou faring?"

ELECTRA Well, first thou seest how haggard I am grown. 

ORESTES So wasted with sorrow that I weep for thee. 

ELECTRA Next mark my head, shorn and shaven like a Scythian's.

ORESTES Thy brother's fate and father's death no doubt disturb thee.

ELECTRA Yes, alas! for what have I more dear than these?

ORESTES Ah! and what dost thou suppose is dearer to thy brother?

ELECTRA He is far away, not here to show his love to me.

ORESTES Wherefore art thou living here far from the city?

ELECTRA I am wedded, sir; a fatal match! 

ORESTES Alas! for thy brother; I pity him. Is thy husband of Mycenae?

ELECTRA He is not the man to whom my father ever thought of betrothing
me. 

ORESTES Tell me all, that I may report it to thy brother.

ELECTRA I live apart from my husband in this house. 

ORESTES The only fit inmate would be a hind or herd. 

ELECTRA Poor he is, yet he displays a generous consideration for
me. 

ORESTES Why, what is this consideration that attaches to thy husband?

ELECTRA He has never presumed to claim from me a husband's rights.

ORESTES Is he under a vow of chastity? or does he disdain thee?

ELECTRA He thought he had no right to flout my ancestry.

ORESTES How was it he was not overjoyed at winning such a bride?

ELECTRA He does not recognize the right of him who disposed of my
hand. 

ORESTES I understand; he was afraid of the vengeance of Orestes hereafter.

ELECTRA There was that fear, but he was a virtuous man as well.

ORESTES Ah! a noble nature this! He deserves kind treatment.

ELECTRA Yes, if ever the wanderer return. 

ORESTES But did thy own mother give in to this? 

ELECTRA 'Tis her husband, not her children that a woman loves, sir
stranger. 

ORESTES Wherefore did Aegisthus put this affront on thee?

ELECTRA His design in giving me to such a husband was to weaken my
offspring 

ORESTES To prevent thee bearing sons, I suppose, who should punish
him? 

ELECTRA That was his plan; God grant I may avenge me on him for it!

ORESTES Does thy mother's husband know that thou art yet a maid?

ELECTRA He does not; our silence robs him of that knowledge.

ORESTES Are these women friends of thine, who overhear our talk?

ELECTRA They are, and they will keep our conversation perfectly secret.

ORESTES What could Orestes do in this matter, if he did return?

ELECTRA Canst thou ask? Shame on thee for that! Is not this the time
for action? 

ORESTES But suppose he comes, how could he slay his father's murderers?

ELECTRA By boldly meting out the same fate that his father had meted
out to him by his foes. 

ORESTES Wouldst thou be brave enough to help him slay his mother?

ELECTRA Aye, with the self-same axe that drank my father's blood.

ORESTES Am I to tell him this, and that thy purpose firmly holds?

ELECTRA Once I have shed my mother's blood o'er his, then welcome
death! 

ORESTES Ah! would Orestes were standing near to hear that!

ELECTRA I should not know him, sir, if I saw him. 

ORESTES No wonder; you were both children when you parted.

ELECTRA There is only one of my friends would recognize him.

ORESTES The man maybe who is said to have snatched him away from
being murdered? 

ELECTRA Yes, the old servant who tended my father's childhood long
ago. 

ORESTES Did thy father's corpse obtain burial? 

ELECTRA Such burial as it was, after his body had been flung forth
from the palace. 

ORESTES O God! how awful is thy story! Yes, there is a feeling, arising
even from another's distress, that wrings the human heart. Say on,
that when know the loveless tale, which yet I needs must hear, I may
carry it to thy brother. For pity, though it has no place in ignorant
natures, is inborn in the wise; still it may cause trouble to find
excessive cleverness amongst the wise. 

LEADER I too am stirred by the same desire as the stranger. For dwelling
so far from the city I know nothing of its ills, and I should like
to hear about them now myself. 

ELECTRA I will tell you, if I may; and surely I may tell a friend
about my own and my father's grievous misfortunes. Now since thou
movest me to speak, I entreat thee, sir, tell Orestes of our sorrows;
first, describe the dress I wear, the load of squalor that oppresses
me, the hovel I inhabit after my royal home; tell him how hard I have
to work at weaving clothes myself or else go barely clad and do without;
how I carry home on my head water from the brook; no part have I in
holy festival, no place amid the dance; a maiden still I turn from
married dames and from Castor too, to whom they betrothed me before
he joined the heavenly host, for I was his kinswoman. Meantime my
mother, 'mid the spoils of Troy, is seated on her throne, and at her
foot-stool slaves from Asia stand and wait, captives of my father's
spear, whose Trojan robes are fastened with brooches of gold. And
there on the wall my father's blood still leaves a deep dark stain,
while his murderer mounts the dead man's car and fareth forth, proudly
grasping in his blood-stained hands the sceptre with which Agamemnon
would marshal the sons of Hellas. Dishonoured lies his grave; naught
as yet hath it received of drink outpoured or myrtle-spray, but bare
of ornament his tomb is left. Yea, and 'tis said that noble hero who
is wedded to my mother, in his drunken fits, doth leap upon the grave,
and pelt with stones my father's monument, boldly gibing at us on
this wise, "Where is thy son Orestes? Is he ever coming in his glory
to defend thy tomb?" Thus is Orestes flouted behind his back. Oh!
tell him this, kind sir, I pray thee. And there be many calling him
to come,-I am but their mouthpiece,-these suppliant hands, this tongue,
my broken heart, my shaven head, and his own father too. For 'tis
shameful that the sire should have destroyed Troy's race and the son
yet prove too weak to pit himself against one foe unto the death,
albeit he has youth and better blood as well. 

LEADER Lo! here is thy husband hurrying homeward, his labour done.

PEASANT (entering and catching sight of strangers talking to ELECTRA)
Ha! who are these strangers I see at my door? And why are they come
hither to my rustic gate? can they want my help? for 'tis unseemly
for a woman to stand talking with young men. 

ELECTRA Dear husband, be not suspicious of me. For thou shalt hear
the truth; these strangers have come to bring me news of Orestes.
Good sirs, pardon him those words. 

PEASANT What say they? is that hero yet alive and in the light of
day? 

ELECTRA He is; at least they say so, and I believe them.

PEASANT Surely then he hath some memory of his father and thy wrongs?

ELECTRA These are things to hope for; a man in exile is helpless.

PEASANT What message have they brought from Orestes? 

ELECTRA He sent them to spy out my evil case. 

PEASANT Well, they only see a part of it, though maybe thou art telling
them the rest. 

ELECTRA They know all; there is nothing further they need ask.

PEASANT Long ere this then shouldst thou have thrown open our doors
to them. Enter, sirs; for in return for your good tidings, shall ye
find such cheer as my house affords. Ho! servants, take their baggage
within; make no excuses, for ye are friends sent by one I love; and
poor though I am, yet will I never show meanness in my habits.

ORESTES 'Fore heaven! is this the man who is helping thee to frustrate
thy marriage, because he will not shame Orestes? 

ELECTRA This is he whom they call my husband, woe is me!

ORESTES Ah! there is no sure mark to recognize a man's worth; for
human nature hath in it an element of confusion. For I have seen ere
now the son of noble sire prove himself a worthless knave, and virtuous
children sprung from evil parents; likewise dearth in a rich man's
spirit, and in a poor man's frame a mighty soul. By what standard
then shall we rightly judge these things? By wealth? An evil test
to use. By poverty then? Nay, poverty suffers from this, that it teaches
a man to play the villain from necessity. To martial prowess must
I turn? But who could pronounce who is the valiant man merely from
the look of his spear? Better is it to leave these matters to themselves
without troubling. For here is a man of no account in Argos, with
no family reputation to boast, one of the common herd, proved a very
hero. A truce to your folly! ye self-deceivers, swollen with idle
fancies; learn to judge men by their converse, and by their habits
decide who are noble. Such are they who rule aright both states and
families; while those forms of flesh, devoid of intellect, are but
figure-heads in the market-place. The strong arm, again, no more than
the weak awaits the battle-shock, for this depends on natural courage.
Well! absent or present, Agamemnon's son, whose business brings us
here, deserves this of us, so let us accept a lodging in this house.
(Calling to his servants)  Ho! sirrahs, go within. A humble host,
who does his best, in preference to a wealthy man for me! And so I
thankfully accept this peasant's proffered welcome, though I could
have preferred that thy brother were conducting me to share his fortune
in his halls. Maybe he yet will come; for the oracies of Loxias are
sure, but to man's divining "Farewell" say I.  (ORESTES, PYLADES and
their attendants go into the hut.)  

LEADER Electra, I feel a warmer glow of joy suffuse my heart than
ever heretofore; perchance our fortune, moving on at last, will find
a happy resting-place. 

ELECTRA O reckless man, why didst thou welcome strangers like these,
so far beyond thy station, knowing the poverty of thy house?

PEASANT Why? if they are really as noble as they seem, surely they
will be equally content with rich or humble fare. 

ELECTRA Well. since thou hast made this error, poor man as thou art,
go to my father's kind old foster-sire; on the bank of the river Tanaus,
the boundary 'twixt Argos and the land of Sparta, he tends his flocks,
an outcast from the city; bid him come hither to our house and some
provision for the strangers' entertainment. Glad will he be, and will
offer thanks to heaven to hear that the child, whom once he saved,
is yet alive. I shall get nothing from my mother from my ancestral
halls; for we should rue our message, were she to learn, unnatural
wretch! that Orestes liveth. 

PEASANT I will take this message to the old man, if it seem good
to thee; but get thee in at once and there make ready. A woman, when
she chooses, can find dainties in plenty to garnish a feast. Besides,
there is quite enough in the house to satisfy them with food for one
day at least. 'Tis in such cases, when I come to muse thereon, that
I discern the mighty power of wealth, whether to give to strangers,
or to expend in curing the body when it falls sick; but our daily
food is a small matter; for all of us, rich as well as poor, are in
like case, as soon as we are satisfied.  (The PEASANT departs as ELECTRA
enters the hut.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Ye famous ships, that on a day were brought to land at Troy by those
countless oars, what time ye led the Nereids' dance, where the dolphin
music-loving rolled and gambolled round your dusky prows, escorting
Achilles, nimble son of Thetis, when he went with Agamemnon to the
banks of Trojan Simois; 

(antistrophe 1)

When Nereids left Euboea's strand, bringing from Hephaestus' golden
forge the harness he had fashioned for that warrior's use; him long
they sought o'er Pelion and Ossa's spurs, ranging the sacred glens
and the peaks of Nymphaea, where his knightly sire was training up
a light for Hellas, even the sea-born son of Thetis, a warrior swift
to help the sons of Atreus. 

(strophe 2)

One that came from Ilium, and set foot in the haven of Nauplia, told
me that on the circle of thy far-famed targe, O son of Thetis, was
wrought this blazon, a terror to the Phrygians; on the rim of the
buckler Perseus with winged sandals, was bearing in his hand across
the main the Gorgon's head, just severed by the aid of Hermes, the
messenger of Zeus, that rural god whom Maia bore; 

(antistrophe 2)

While in the centre of the shield the sun's bright orb flashed light
on the backs of his winged coursers; there too was the heavenly choir
of stars, Pleiades and Hyades, to dazzle Hector's eyes and make him
flee; and upon his gold-forged helm were sphinxes, bearing in their
talons the prey of which the minstrels sing; on his breast-plate was
lioness breathing flame, her eye upon Peirene's steed, in eagerness
to rend it. 

There too in murderous fray four-footed steeds were prancing, while
oer their backs uprose dark clouds of dust. But he who led these warriors
stout, was slain by wedding thee, malignant child of Tyndareus! Wherefore
shall the gods of heaven one day send thee to thy doom, and I shall
yet live to see the sword at thy throat, drinking its crimson tide.
(The OLD MAN, the former servant of Agamemnon, enters. ELECTRA presently
appears at the door of the hut.)  

OLD MAN Where is the young princess, my mistress, Agamemnon's daughter,
whom I nursed in days gone by? Oh! how steep is the approach to this
house, a hard climb for these old wasted feet of mine! Still, to reach
such friends as these, I must drag my bent old back and tottering
knees up it. Ah, daughter!-for I see thee now at thy door,-lo! I have
brought the this tender lamb from my own flock, having taken it from
its dam, with garlands too and cheese straight from the press, and
this flask of choice old wine with fragrant bouquet; 'tis small perhaps,
but pour a cup thereof into some weaker drink, and it is a luscious
draught. Let some one carry these gifts into the house for the guests;
for I would fain wipe from my eyes the rising tears on this tattered
cloak. 

ELECTRA Why stands the tear-drop in thine eye, old friend? Is it
that my sorrows have been recalled to thee after an interval? or art
thou bewailing the sad exile of Orestes, and my father's fate, whom
thou didst once fondle in thy arms, in vain, alas! for thee and for
thy friends? 

OLD MAN Ah yes! in vain; but still I could not bear to leave him
thus; and so I added this to my journey that I sought his grave, and,
falling thereupon, wept o'er its desolation; then did I open the wine-skin,
my gift to thy guests, and poured a libation, and set myrtle-sprigs
round the tomb. And lo! upon the grave itself I saw a black ram had
been offered, and there was blood, not long poured forth, and severed
locks of auburn hair. Much I wondered, my daughter, who had dared
approach the tomb; certainly 'twas no Argive. Nay, thy brother may
perchance have come by stealth, and going thither have done honour
to his father's wretched grave. Look at the hair, compare it with
thy own, to see if the colour of these cut locks is the same; for
children in whose veins runs the same father's blood have a close
resemblance in many features. 

ELECTRA Old sir, thy words are unworthy of a wise man, if thou thinkest
my own brave brother would have come to this land by stealth for fear
of Aegisthus. In the next place, how should our hair correspond? His
is the hair of a gallant youth trained up in manly sports, mine a
woman's curled and combed; nay, that is a hopeless clue. Besides,
thou couldst find many, whose hair is of the same colour, albeit not
sprung from the same blood. No, maybe 'twas some stranger cut off
his hair in pity at his tomb, or one that came to spy this land privily.

OLD MAN Put thy foot in the print of his shoe and mark whether it
correspond with thine, my child. 

ELECTRA How should the foot make any impression on stony ground?
and if it did, the foot of brother and sister would not be the same
in size, for man's is the larger. 

OLD MAN Hast thou no mark, in case thy brother should come, whereby
to recognize the weaving of thy loom, the robe wherein I snatched
him from death that day? 

ELECTRA Dost thou forget I was still a babe when Orestes left the
country? and even if I had woven him a robe, how should he, a mere
child then, be wearing the same now, unless our clothes and bodies
grow together? 

OLD MAN Where are these guests? I fain would question them face to
face about thy brother.  (As he speaks, ORESTES and PYLADES come out
of the hut.)  

ELECTRA There they are, in haste to leave the house. 

OLD MAN Well born, it seems, but that may be a sham; for there be
plenty such prove knaves. Still I give them greeting. 

ORESTES All hail, father! To which of thy friends, Electra, does
this old relic of mortality belong? 

ELECTRA This is he who nursed my sire, sir stranger. 

ORESTES What! do I behold him who removed thy brother out of harm's
way? 

ELECTRA Behold the man who saved his life; if, that is, he liveth
still. 

ORESTES Ha! why does he look so hard at me, as if he were examining
the bright device on silver coin? Is he finding in me a likeness to
some other? 

ELECTRA Maybe he is glad to see in thee a companion of Orestes.

ORESTES A man I love full well. But why is he walking round me?

ELECTRA I, too, am watching his movements with amaze, sir stranger.

OLD MAN My honoured mistress, my daughter Electra, return thanks
to heaven,- 

ELECTRA For past or present favours? which? 

OLD MAN That thou hast found a treasured prize, which God is now
revealing. 

ELECTRA Hear me invoke the gods. But what dost thou mean, old man?

OLD MAN Behold before thee, my child, thy nearest and dearest.

ELECTRA I have long feared thou wert not in thy sound senses

OLD MAN Not in my sound senses, because I see thy brother?

ELECTRA What mean'st thou, aged friend, by these astounding words?

OLD MAN That I see Orestes, Agamemnon's son, before me.

ELECTRA What mark dost see that I can trust? 

OLD MAN A scar along his brow, where he fell and cut himself one
day in his father's home when chasing a fawn with thee. 

ELECTRA Is it possible? True; I see the mark of the fall.

OLD MAN Dost hesitate then to embrace thy own dear brother?

ELECTRA No! not any longer, old friend; for my soul is convinced
by the tokens thou showest. O my brother, thou art come at last, and
I embrace thee, little as I ever thought to. 

ORESTES And thee to my bosom at last I press. 

ELECTRA I never thought that it would happen. 

ORESTES All hope in me was also dead. 

ELECTRA Art thou really he? 

ORESTES Aye, thy one and only champion, if I can but safely draw
to shore the cast I mean to throw; and I feel sure I shall; else must
we cease to believe in gods, if wrong is to triumph o'er right.

CHORUS  (singing) At last, at last appears thy radiant dawn, O happy
day! and as beacon to the city hast thou revealed the wanderer, who,
long ago, poor boy! was exiled from his father's halls. Now, lady,
comes our turn for victory, ushered in by some god. Raise hand and
voice in prayer, beseech the gods that good fortune may attend thy
brother's entry to the city. 

ORESTES Enough! sweet though the rapture of this greeting be, I must
wait and return it hereafter. Do thou, old friend so timely met, tell
me how I am to avenge me on my father's murderer, and on my mother,
the partner in his guilty marriage. Have I still in Argos any band
of kindly friends? or am I, like my fortunes, bankrupt altogether?
With whom am I to league myself? by night or day shall I advance?
point out a road for me to take against these foes of mine.

OLD MAN My son, thou hast no friend now in thy hour of adversity.
No! that is a piece of rare good luck, to find another share thy fortunes
alike for better and for worse. Thou art of every friend completely
reft, all hope is gone from thee; be sure of what I tell thee; on
thy own arm and fortune art thou wholly thrown to win thy father's
home and thy city. 

ORESTES What must I do to compass this result? 

OLD MAN Slay Thyestes' son and thy mother. 

ORESTES I came to win that victor's crown, but how can I attain it?

OLD MAN Thou wouldst never achieve it if thou didst enter the walls.

ORESTES Are they manned with guards and armed sentinels?

OLD MAN Aye truly; for he is afraid of thee, and cannot sleep secure.

ORESTES Well then, do thou next propose a scheme, old friend.

OLD MAN Hear me a moment; an idea has just occurred to me.

ORESTES May thy counsel prove good, and my perception keen!

OLD MAN I saw Aegisthus, as I was slowly pacing hither-

ORESTES I welcome thy words. Where was he? 

OLD MAN Not far from these fields, at his stables. 

ORESTES What was he doing? I see a gleam of hope after our helplessness.

OLD MAN I thought he was preparing a feast for the Nymphs.

ORESTES In return for the bringing up of children or in anticipation
of a birth? 

OLD MAN All I know is this, he was preparing to sacrifice oxen.

ORESTES How many were with him? or was he alone with his servants?

OLD MAN There was no Argive there; only a band of his own followers.

ORESTES Is it possible that any of them will recognize me, old man?

OLD MAN They are only servants, and they have never even seen thee.

ORESTES Will they support me, if I prevail? 

OLD MAN Yes, that is the way of slaves, luckily for thee.

ORESTES On what pretext can I approach him? 

OLD MAN Go to some place where he will see thee as he sacrifices.

ORESTES His estate is close to the road then, I suppose.

OLD MAN Yes, and when he sees thee there, he will invite thee to
the feast. 

ORESTES So help me God! He shall rue his invitation. 

OLD MAN After that, form thy own plan according to circumstances.

ORESTES Good advice! But my mother, where is she? 

OLD MAN At Argos; but she will yet join her husband for the feast.

ORESTES Why did she not come forth with him? 

OLD MAN From fear of the citizens' reproach she stayed behind.

ORESTES I understand; she knows that the city suspects her.

OLD MAN Just so; her wickedness makes her hated. 

ORESTES How shall I slay her and him together? 

ELECTRA Mine be the preparation of my mother's slaying!

ORESTES Well, as for the other, fortune will favour us.

ELECTRA Our old friend here must help us both. 

OLD MAN Aye, that will I; but wnat is thy scheme for slaying thy
mother? 

ELECTRA Go, old man, and tell Clytemnestra from me that I have given
birth to a son. 

OLD MAN Some time ago, or quite recently? 

ELECTRA Ten days ago, which are the days of my purification.

OLD MAN Suppose it done; but how doth this help towards slaying thy
mother? 

ELECTRA She will come, when she hears of my confinement.

OLD MAN What! dost think she cares aught for thee, my child?

ELECTRA Oh yes! she will weep no doubt over my child's low rank.

OLD MAN Perhaps she may; but go back again to the point.

ELECTRA Her death is certain, if she comes. 

OLD MAN In that case, let her come right up to the door of the house.

ELECTRA Why then it were a little thing to turn her steps into the
road to Hades' halls. 

OLD MAN Oh! to see this one day, then die! 

ELECTRA First of all, old friend, act as my brother's guide.

OLD MAN To the place where Aegisthus is now sacrificing to the gods?

ELECTRA Then go, find my mother and give her my message.

OLD MAN Aye, that I will, so that she shall think the very words
are thine. 

ELECTRA  (to ORESTES) Thy work begins at once; thou hast drawn the
first lot in the tragedy. 

ORESTES I will go, if some one will show me the way. 

OLD MAN I will myself conduct thee nothing loth. 

ORESTES O Zeus, god of my fathers, vanquisher of my foes, have pity
on us, for a piteous lot has ours been. 

ELECTRA Oh! have pity on thy own descendants. 

ORESTES O Hera, mistress of Mycenae's altars, grant us the victory,
if we are asking what is right. 

ELECTRA Yes, grant us vengeance on them for our father's death.

ORESTES Thou too, my father, sent to the land of shades by wicked
hands, and Earth, the queen of all, to whom I spread my suppliant
palms, up and champion thy dear children. Come with all the dead to
aid, all they who helped thee break the Phrygians' power, and all
who hate ungodly crime. Dost hear me, father, victim of my mother's
rage? 

ELECTRA Sure am I he heareth all; but 'tis time to part. For this
cause too I bid thee strike Aegisthus down, because, if thou fall
in the struggle and perish, I also die; no longer number me amongst
the living; for I will stab myself with a two-edged sword. And now
will I go indoors and make all ready there, for, if there come good
news from thee, my house shall ring with women's cries of joy; but,
if thou art slain, a different scene must then ensue. These are my
instructions to thee. 

ORESTES I know my lesson well.  (ORESTES, PYLADES, the OLD MAN, and
attendants, depart.)  

ELECTRA Then show thyself a man. And you, my friends, signal to me
by cries the certain issue of this fray. Myself will keep the sword
ready in my grasp, for I will never accept defeat, and yield my body
to my enemies to insult.  (ELECTRA goes into the hut.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Still the story finds a place in time-honoured legends, how on day
Pan, the steward of husbandry, came breathing dulcet music on his
jointed pipe, and brought with him from its tender dam on Argive hills,
a beauteous lamb with fleece of gold; then stood a herald high upon
the rock and cried aloud, "Away to the place of assembly, ye folk
of Mycenae! to behold the strange and awful sight vouchsafed to our
blest rulers." Anon the dancers did obeisance to the family of Atreus;

(antistrophe 1)

The altar-steps of beaten gold were draped; and through that Argive
town the altars blazed with fire; sweetly rose the lute's clear note,
the handmaid of the Muse's song; and ballads fair were written on
the golden lamb, saying that Thyestes had the luck; for he won the
guilty love of the wife of Atreus, and carried off to his house the
strange creature, and then coming before the assembled folk he declared
to them that he had in his house that horned beast with fleece of
gold. 

(strophe 2)

In the self-same hour it was that Zeus changed the radiant courses
of the stars, the light of the sun, and the joyous face of dawn, and
drave his car athwart the western sky with fervent heat from heaven's
fires, while northward fled the rain-clouds, and Ammon's strand grew
parched and faint and void of dew, when it was robbed of heaven's
genial showers. 

(antistrophe 2)

'Tis said, though I can scarce believe it, the sun turned round his
glowing throne of gold, to vex the sons of men by this change because
of the quarrel amongst them. Still, tales of horror have their use
in making men regard the gods; of whom thou hadst no thought, when
thou slewest thy husband, thou mother of this noble pair.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Hark! my friends, did ye hear that noise, like
to the rumbling of an earthquake, or am I the dupe of idle fancy?
Hark! hark! once more that wind-borne sound swells loudly on mine
ear. Electra! mistress mine! come forth from the house! 

ELECTRA  (rushing out) What is it, good friends? how goes the day
with us? 

LEADER I hear the cries of dying men; no more I know. 

ELECTRA I heard them too, far off, but still distinct. 

LEADER Yes, the sound came stealing from afar, but yet 'twas clear.

ELECTRA Was it the groan of an Argive, or of my friends?

LEADER I know not; for the cries are all confused. 

ELECTRA That word of thine is my death-warrant; why do I delay?

LEADER Stay, till thou learn thy fate for certain. 

ELECTRA No, no; we are vanquished; where are our messengers?

LEADER They will come in time; to slay a king is no light task.
(A MESSENGER enters in haste.)  

MESSENGER All hail! ye victors, maidens of Mycenae, to all Orestes'
friends his triumph I announce; Aegisthus, the murderer of Agamemnon,
lies weltering where he fell; return thanks to heaven. 

ELECTRA Who art thou? What proof dost thou give of this?

MESSENGER Look at me, dost thou not recognize thy brother's servant?

ELECTRA O best of friends! 'twas fear that prevented me from recognizing
thee; now I know thee well. What sayst thou? Is my father's hateful
murderer slain? 

MESSENGER He is; I repeat it since it is thy wish. 

LEADER Ye gods, and justice, whose eye is on all, at last art thou
come. 

ELECTRA I fain would learn the way and means my brother took to slay
Thyestes' son. 

MESSENGER After we had set out from this house, we struck into the
broad highroad, and came to the place where was the far-famed King
of Mycenae. Now he was walking in a garden well-watered, culling a
wreath of tender myrtle-sprays for his head, and when he saw us, he
called out, "All hail! strangers; who are ye? whence come ye? from
what country?" To him Orestes answered, "We are from Thessaly, on
our way to Alpheus' banks to sacrifice to Olympian Zeus." When Aegisthus
heard that, he said, "Ye must be my guests to-day, and share the feast,
for I am even now sacrificing to the Nymphs; and by rising with tomorrow's
light ye will be just as far upon your journey; now let us go within."
Therewith he caught us by the hand and led us by the way; refuse we
could not; and when we were come to the house, he gave command: "Bring
water for my guests to wash forthwith, that they may stand around
the altar near the laver." But Orestes answered, "'Twas but now we
purified ourselves and washed us clean in water from the river. So
if we strangers are to join your citizens in sacrifice, we are ready,
King Aegisthus, and will not refuse." So ended they their private
conference. Meantime the servants, that composed their master's bodyguard,
laid aside their weapons, and one and all were busied at their tasks.
Some brought the bowl to catch the blood, others took up baskets,
while others kindled fire and set cauldrons round about the altars,
and the whole house rang. Then did thy mother's husband take the barley
for sprinkling, and began casting it upon the hearth with these words,
"Ye Nymphs, who dwell among the rocks, grant that I may often sacrifice
with my wife, the daughter of Tyndareus, within my halls, as happily
as now, and ruin seize my foes!"  (whereby he meant Orestes and thyself)
. But my master, lowering his voice, offered a different prayer,
that he might regain his father's house. Next Aegisthus took from
basket a long straight knife, and cutting off some of the calf's hair,
laid it with his right hand on the sacred fire, and then cut its throat
when the servants had lifted it upon their shoulders, and thus addressed
thy brother; "Men declare that amongst the Thessalians this is counted
honourable, to cut up a bull neatly and to manage steeds. So take
the knife, sir stranger, and show us if rumour speaks true about the
Thessalians." Thereon Orestes seized the Dorian knife of tempered
steel and cast from his shoulders his graceful buckled robe; then
choosing Pylades to help him in his task, he made the servants withdraw,
and catching the calf by the hoof, proceeded to lay bare its white
flesh, with arm outstretched, and he flayed the hide quicker than
a runner ever finishes the two laps of the horses' race-course; next
he laid the belly open, and Aegisthus took the entrails in his hands
and carefully examined them. Now the liver had no lobe, while the
portal vein leading to the gall-bladder portended dangerous attack
on him who was observing it. Dark grows Aegisthus' brow, but my master
asks, "Why so despondent, good sir?" Said he, "I fear treachery from
a stranger. Agamemnon's son of all men most I hate, and he hates my
house." But Orestes cried, "What! fear treachery from an exile! thou
the ruler of the city? Ho! take this Dorian knife away and bring me
a Thessalian cleaver, that we by sacrificial feast may learn the will
of heaven; let me cleave the breast-bone." And he took the axe and
cut it through. Now Aegisthus was examining the entrails, separating
them in his hands, and as he was bending down, thy brother rose on
tiptoe and smote him on the spine, severing the bones of his back;
and his body gave one convulsive shudder from head to foot and writhed
in the death-agony. No sooner did his servants see it, than they rushed
to arms, a host to fight with two; yet did Pylades and Orestes of
their valiancy meet them with brandished spears. Then cried Orestes,
"I am no foe that come against this city and my own servants, but
I have avenged me on the murderer of my sire, I, ill-starred Orestes.
Slay me not, my father's former thralls!" They, when they heard him
speak, restrained their spears, and an old man, who had been in the
family many a long year, recognized him. Forthwith they crown thy
brother with a wreath, and utter shouts of joy. And lo! he is coming
to show thee the head, not the Gorgon's, but the head of thy hated
foe Aegisthus; his death today has paid in blood a bitter debt of
blood. 

CHORUS  (singing) Dear mistress, now with step as light as fawn join
in the dance; lift high the nimble foot and be glad. Victory crowns
thy brother; he hath won a fairer wreath than ever victor gained beside
the streams of Alpheus; so raise a fair hymn to victory, the while
I dance. 

ELECTRA O light of day! O bright careering sun! O earth! and night
erewhile my only day; now may I open my eyes in freedom, for Aegisthus
is dead, my father's murderer. Come friends, let me bring out whate'er
my house contains to deck his head and wreath with crowns my conquering
brother's brow. 

CHORUS  (singing) Bring forth thy garlands for his head, and we will
lead the dance the Muses love. Now shall the royal line, dear to us
in days gone by, resume its sway o'er the realm, having laid low the
usurper as he deserves. So let the shout go up, whose notes are those
of joy.  (ORESTES and PYLADES enter, followed by attendants who are
bearing the body of Aegisthus.)  

ELECTRA Hail! glorious victor, Orestes, son of a sire who won the
day 'neath Ilium's walls, accept this wreath to bind about the tresses
of thy hair. Not in vain hast thou run thy course unto the goal and
reached thy home again; no! but thou hast slain thy foe, Aegisthus,
the murderer of our father. Thou too, O Pylades, trusty squire, whose
training shows thy father's sterling worth, receive a garland from
my hand, for thou no less than he hast a share in this emprise; and
so I pray, good luck be thine for ever! 

ORESTES First recognize the gods, Electra, as being the authors of
our fortune, and then praise me their minister and fate's. Yea, I
come from having slain Aegisthus in very deed, no mere pretence; and
to make thee the more certain of this, I am bringing thee his corpse,
which, if thou wilt, expose for beasts to rend, or set it upon a stake
for birds, the children of the air, to prey upon; for now is he thy
slave, once called thy lord and master. 

ELECTRA I am ashamed to utter my wishes. 

ORESTES What is it? speak out, for thou art through the gates of
fear. 

ELECTRA I am ashamed to flout the dead, for fear some spite assail
me. 

ORESTES No one would blame thee for this. 

ELECTRA Our folk are hard to please, and love to blame.

ORESTES Speak all thy mind, sister; for we entered on this feud with
him on terms admitting not of truce. 

ELECTRA Enough!  (Turning to the corpse of Aegisthus)  With which
of thy iniquities shall I begin my recital? With which shall I end
it? To which allot a middle place? And yet I never ceased, as each
day dawned, to rehearse the story I would tell thee to thy face, if
ever I were freed from my old terrors; and now I am; so I will pay
thee back with the abuse I fain had uttered to thee when alive. Thou
wert my ruin, making me and my brother orphans, though we had never
injured thee, and thou didst make a shameful marriage with my mother,
having slain her lord who led the host of Hellas, though thyself didst
never go to Troy. Such was thy folly, thou didst never dream that
my mother would prove thy curse when thou didst marry her, though
thou wert wronging my father's honour. Know this; whoso defiles his
neighbour's wife, and afterward is forced to take her to himself,
is a wretched wight, if he supposes she will be chaste as his wife,
though she sinned against her former lord. Thine was a life most miserable,
though thou didst pretend 'twas otherwise; well thou knewest how guilty
thy marriage was, and my mother knew she had a villain for husband.
Sinners both ye took each other's lot, she thy fortune, thou her curse.
While everywhere in Argos thou-wouldst hear such phrases as, "that
woman's husband," never "that man's wife." Yet 'tis shameful for the
wife and not the man to rule the house; wherefore I loathe those children,
who are called in the city not the sons of the man, their father,
but of their mother. For if a man makes a great match above his rank,
there is no talk of the husband but only of the wife. Herein lay thy
grievous error, due to ignorance; thou thoughtest thyself some one,
relying on thy wealth, but this is naught save to stay with us a space.
'Tis nature that stands fast, not wealth. For it, if it abide unchanged,
exalts man's horn; but riches dishonestly acquired and in the hands
of fools, soon take their flight, their blossom quickly shed. As for
thy sins with women, I pass them by, 'tis not for maiden's lips to
mention them, but I will shrewdly hint thereat. And then thy arrogance!
because forsooth thou hadst a palace and some looks to boast. May
I never have a husband with a girl's face, but one that bears him
like a man! For the children of these latter cling to a life of arms,
while those, who are so fair to see, do only serve to grace the dance.
Away from me!  (Spurning the corpse with her foot)  Time has shown
thy villainy, little as thou reckest of the forfeit thou hast paid
for it. Let none suppose, though he have run the first stage of his
course with joy, that he will get the better of justice, till he have
reached the goal and ended his career. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Terrible alike his crime and your revenge; for
mighty is the power of justice. 

ORESTES 'Tis well. Carry his body within the house and hide it, sirrahs,
that when my mother comes, she may not see his corpse before she is
smitten herself.  (PYLADES and the attendants take the body into the
hut.)  

ELECTRA Hold! let us strike out another scheme. 

ORESTES How now? Are those allies from Mycenae whom I see?

ELECTRA No, 'tis my mother, that bare me. 

ORESTES Full into the net she is rushing, oh, bravely! 

ELECTRA See how proudly she rides in her chariot and fine robes!

ORESTES What must we do to our mother? Slay her? 

ELECTRA What! has pity seized thee at sight of her? 

ORESTES O God! how can I slay her that bare and suckled me?

ELECTRA Slay her as she slew thy father and mine. 

ORESTES O Phoebus, how foolish was thy oracle- 

ELECTRA Where Apollo errs, who shall be wise? 

ORESTES In bidding me commit this crime-my mother's murder!

ELECTRA How canst thou be hurt by avenging thy father? 

ORESTES Though pure before, I now shall carry into exile the stain
of a mother's blood. 

ELECTRA Still, if thou avenge not thy father, thou wilt fail in thy
duty. 

ORESTES And if I slay my mother, I must pay the penalty to her.

ELECTRA And so must thou to him, if thou resign the avenging of our
father. 

ORESTES Surely it was a fiend in the likeness of the god that ordered
this! 

ELECTRA Seated on the holy tripod? I think not so. 

ORESTES I cannot believe this oracle was meant. 

ELECTRA Turn not coward! Cast not thy manliness away! 

ORESTES Am I to devise the same crafty scheme for her? 

ELECTRA The self-same death thou didst mete out to her lord Aegisthus.

ORESTES I will go in; 'tis an awful task I undertake; an awful deed
I have to do; still if it is Heaven's will, be it so; I loathe and
yet I love the enterprise.  (As ORESTES withdraws into the hut, CLYTEMNESTRA
enters in a chariot. Her attendants are hand-maidens attired in gorgeous
apparel.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Hail! Queen of Argos, daughter of Tyndareus, sister
of those two noble sons of Zeus, who dwell in the flame-lit firmament
amid the stars, whose guerdon high it is to save the sailor tossing
on the sea. All hail! because of thy wealth and high prosperity, I
do thee homage as I do the blessed gods. Now is the time, great queen,
for us to pay our court unto thy fortunes. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Alight from the car, ye Trojan maids, and take my hand
that I may step down from the chariot. With Trojan spoils the temples
of the gods are decked, but I have obtained these maidens as a special
gift from Troy, in return for my lost daughter, a trifling boon no
doubt, but still an ornament to my house. 

ELECTRA And may not I, mother, take that highly-favoured hand of
thine? I am a slave like them, an exile from my father's halls in
this miserable abode. 

CLYTEMNESTRA See, my servants are here; trouble not on my account.

ELECTRA Why, thou didst make me thy prisoner by robbing me of my
home; like these I became a captive when my home was taken, an orphan
all forlorn. 

CLYTEMNESTRA True; but thy father plotted so wickedly against those
of his own kin whom least of all he should have treated so. Speak
I must; albeit, when woman gets an evil reputation, there is a feeling
of bitterness against all she says; unfairly indeed in my case, for
it were only fair to hate after learning the circumstances, and seeing
if the object deserves it; otherwise, why hate at all? Now Tyndareus
bestowed me on thy father not that I or any children I might bear
should be slain. Yet he went and took my daughter from our house to
the fleet at Aulis, persuading me that Achilles was to wed her; and
there he held her o'er the pyre, and cut Iphigenia's snowy throat.
Had he slain her to save his city from capture, or to benefit his
house, or to preserve his other children, a sacrifice of one for many,
could have pardoned him. But, as it was, his reasons for murdering
my child were these: the wantonness of Helen and her husband's folly
in not punishing the traitress. Still, wronged as I was, my rage had
not burst forth for this, nor would I have slain my lord, had he not
returned to me with that frenzied maiden and made her his mistress,
keeping at once two brides beneath the same roof. Women maybe are
given to folly, I do not deny it; this granted, when a husband goes
astray and sets aside his own true wife, she fain will follow his
example and find another love; and then in our case hot abuse is heard,
while the men, who are to blame for this, escape without a word. Again,
suppose Menelaus had been secretly snatched from his home, should
I have had to kill Orestes to save Menelaus, my sister's husband?
How would thy father have endured this? Was he then to escape death
for slaying what was mine, while I was to suffer at his hands? I slew
him, turning, as my only course, to his enemies. For which of all
thy father's friends would have joined me in his murder? Speak all
that is in thy heart, and prove against me with all free speech, that
thy father's death was not deserved. 

ELECTRA Justly urged! but thy justice is not free from shame; for
in all things should every woman of sense yield to her husband. Whoso
thinketh otherwise comes not within the scope of what I say. Remember,
mother, those last words of thine, allowing me free utterance before
thee. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Daughter, far from refusing it, I grant it again.

ELECTRA Thou wilt not, when thou hearest, wreak thy vengeance on
me? 

CLYTEMNESTRA No, indeed; I shall welcome thy opinion. 

ELECTRA Then will I speak, and this shall be the prelude of my speech:
Ah, mother mine! would thou hadst had a better heart; for though thy
beauty and Helen's win you praises well deserved, yet are ye akin
in nature, pair of wantons, unworthy of Castor. She was carried off,
'tis true, but her fall was voluntary: and thou hast slain the bravest
soul in Hellas, excusing thyself on the ground that thou didst kill
a husband to avenge a daughter; the world does not know thee so well
as I do, thou who before ever thy daughter's death was decided, yea,
soon as thy lord had started from his home, wert combing thy golden
tresses at thy mirror. That wife who, when her lord is gone from home,
sets to beautifying herself, strike off from virtue's list; for she
has no need to carry her beauty abroad, save she is seeking some mischief.
Of all the wives in Hellas thou wert the only one I know who wert
overjoyed when Troy's star was in the ascendant, while, if it set,
thy brow was clouded, since thou hadst no wish that Agamemnon should
return from Troy. And yet thou couldst have played a virtuous part
to thy own glory. The husband thou hadst was no whit inferior to Aegisthus,
for he it was whom Hellas chose to be her captain. And when thy sister
Helen wrought that deed of shame, thou couldst have won thyself great
glory, for vice is a warning and calls attention to virtue. If, as
thou allegest, my father slew thy daughter, what is the wrong I and
my brother have done thee? How was it thou didst not bestow on us
our father's halls after thy husband's death, instead of bartering
them to buy a paramour? Again, thy husband is not exiled for thy son's
sake, nor is he slain to avenge my death, although by him this life
is quenched twice as much as e'er my sister's was; so if murder is
to succeed murder in requital, I and thy son Orestes must slay thee
to avenge our father; if that was just, why so is this. Whoso fixes
his gaze on wealth or noble birth and weds a wicked woman, is a fool;
better is a humble partner in his home, if she be virtuous, than a
proud one. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Chance rules the marriages of women; some I
see turn out well, others ill amongst mankind. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Daughter, 'twas ever thy nature to love thy father.
This too one finds; some sons cling to their father, others have a
deeper affection for their mother. I will forgive thee, for myself
am not so exceeding glad at the deed that I have done, my child. But
thou,-why thus unwashed and clad in foul attire, now that the days
of thy lying-in are accomplished? Ah me, for my sorry schemes! I have
goaded my husband into anger more than e'er I should have done.

ELECTRA Thy sorrow comes too late; the hour of remedy has gone from
thee; my father is dead. Yet why not recall that exile, thy own wandering
son? 

CLYTEMNESTRA I am afraid; 'tis my interest, not his that I regard.
For they say he is wroth for his father's murder. 

ELECTRA Why, then, dost thou encourage thy husband's bitterness against
us? 

CLYTEMNESTRA 'Tis his way; thou too hast a stubborn nature.

ELECTRA Because I am grieved; yet will I check my spirit.

CLYTEMNESTRA I promise then he shall no longer oppress thee.

ELECTRA From living in my home he grows too proud. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Now there! 'tis thou that art fanning the quarrel into
new life. 

ELECTRA I say no more; my dread of him is even what it is.

CLYTEMNESTRA Peace! Enough of this. Why didst thou summon me, my
child? 

ELECTRA Thou hast heard, I suppose, of my confinement; for this I
pray thee, since I know not how, offer the customary sacrifice on
the tenth day after birth, for I am a novice herein, never having
had a child before. 

CLYTEMNESTRA This is work for another, even for her who delivered
thee. 

ELECTRA I was all alone in my travail and at the babe's birth.

CLYTEMNESTRA Dost live so far from neighbours? 

ELECTRA No one cares to make the poor his friends. 

CLYTEMNESTRA Well, I will go to offer to the gods a sacrifice for
the child's completion of the days; and when I have done thee this
service, I will seek the field where my husband is sacrificing to
the Nymphs. Take this chariot hence, my servants, and tie the horses
to the stalls; and when ye think that I have finished my offering
to the gods, attend me, for I must likewise pleasure my lord.  (She
goes into the hut.)  

ELECTRA Enter our humble cottage; but, prithee, take care that my
smoke grimed walls soil not thy robes; now wilt thou offer to the
gods a fitting sacrifice. There stands the basket ready, and the knife
is sharpened, the same that slew the bull, by whose side thou soon
wilt lie a corpse; and thou shalt be his bride in Hades' halls whose
wife thou wast on earth. This is the boon I will grant thee, while
thou shalt pay me for my father's blood.  (ELECTRA follows her into
the hut.)  

CHORUS  (chanting, strophe)

Misery is changing sides; the breeze veers round, and now blows fair
upon my house. The day is past when my chief fell murdered in his
bath, and the roof and the very stones of the walls rang with this
his cry: "O cruel wife, why art thou murdering me on my return to
my dear country after ten long years?" 

(antistrophe)

The tide is turning, and justice that pursues the faithless wife
is drawing within its grasp the murderess, who slew her hapless lord,
when he came home at last to these towering Cyclopean walls,-aye,
with her own hand she smote him with the sharpened steel, herself
the axe uplifting. Unhappy husband! whate'er the curse that possessed
that wretched woman. Like a lioness of the hills that rangeth through
the woodland for her prey, she wrought the deed. 

CLYTEMNESTRA  (within) O my children, by Heaven I pray ye spare your
mother. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Dost hear her cries within the house?

CLYTEMNESTRA O God! ah me! 

CHORUS  (chanting) I too bewail thee, dying by thy children's hands.
God deals out His justice in His good time. A cruel fate is thine,
unhappy one; yet didst thou sin in murdering thy lord.  (ORESTES and
ELECTRA come out of the hut, followed by attendants who are carrying
the two corpses. The following lines between ELECTRA, ORESTES and
the CHORUS are chanted.)  But lo! from the house they come, dabbled
in their mother's fresh-spilt gore, their triumph proving the piteous
butchery. There is not nor ever has been a race more wretched than
the line of Tantalus. 

ORESTES O Earth, and Zeus whose eye is over all! behold this foul
deed of blood, these two corpses lying here that I have slain in vengeance
for my sufferings. 

ELECTRA Tears are all too weak for this, brother; and I am the guilty
cause. Ah, woe is me! How hot my fury burned against the mother that
bare me! 

ORESTES Alas! for thy lot, O mother mine! A piteous, piteous doom,
aye, worse than that, hast thou incurred at children's hands! Yet
justly hast thou paid forfeit for our father's blood. Ah, Phoebus!
thine was the voice that praised this vengeance; thou it is that hast
brought these hideous scenes to light, and caused this deed of blood.
To what city can I go henceforth? what friend, what man of any piety
will bear the sight of a mother's murderer like me? 

ELECTRA Ah me! alas! and whither can I go? What share have I henceforth
in dance or marriage rite? What husband will accept me as his bride?

ORESTES Again thy fancy changes with the wind; for now thou thinkest
aright, though not so formerly; an awful deed didst thou urge thy
brother against his will to commit, dear sister. Oh! didst thou see
how the poor victim threw open her robe and showed her bosom as smote
her, sinking on her knees, poor wretch? And her hair I- 

ELECTRA Full well I know the agony through which thou didst pass
at hearing thy own mother's bitter cry. 

ORESTES Ah yes! she laid her band upon my chin, and cried aloud,
"My child, I entreat thee!" and she clung about my neck, so that I
let fall the sword. 

ELECTRA O my poor mother! How didst thou endure to see her breathe
her last before thy eyes? 

ORESTES I threw my mantle o'er them and began the sacrifice by plunging
the sword into my mother's throat. 

ELECTRA Yet 'twas I that urged thee on, yea, and likewise grasped
the steel. Oh! I have done an awful deed. 

ORESTES Oh! take and hide our mother's corpse beneath a pall, and
close her gaping wound.  (Turning to the corpse)  Ah! thy murderers
were thine own children. 

ELECTRA  (covering the corpse) There! thou corpse both loved and
loathed; still o'er thee I cast robe, to end the grievous troubles
of our house. 

CHORUS See! where o'er the roof-top spirits are appearing, or gods
maybe from heaven, for this is not a road that mortals tread. Why
come they thus where mortal eyes can see them clearly?  (THE DIOSCURI
appear from above.)  

DIOSCURI Hearken, son of Agamemnon. We, the twin sons of Zeus, thy
mother's sisters, call thee, even Castor and his brother Polydeuces.
'Tis but now we have reached Argos after stilling the fury of the
sea for mariners, having seen the slaying of our sister, thy mother.
She hath received her just reward, but thine is no righteous act,
and Phoebus-but no! he is my king, my lips are sealed-is Phoebus still,
albeit the oracle he gave thee was no great proof of his wsdom. But
we must acquiesce herein. Henceforth must thou follow what Zeus and
destiny ordain for thee. On Pylades bestow Electra for his wife to
take unto his home; do thou leave Argos, for after thy mother's murder
thou mayst not set foot in the city. And those grim goddesses of doom,
that glare like savage hounds, will drive thee mad and chase thee
to and fro; but go thou to Athens and make thy prayer to the holy
image of Pallas, for she will close their fierce serpents' mouths,
so that they touch thee not, holding o'er thy head her aegis with
the Gorgon's head. A hill there is, to Ares sacred, where first the
gods in conclave sat to decide the law of blood, in the day that savage
Ares slew Halirrothius, son of the ocean-king, in anger for the violence
he offered to his daughter's honour; from that time all decisions
given there are most holy and have heaven's sanction. There must thou
have this murder tried; and if equal votes are given, they shall save
thee from death in the decision, for Loxias will take the blame upon
himself, since it was his oracle that advised thy mother's murder.
And this shall be the law for all posterity; in every trial the accused
shall win his case if the votes are equal. Then shall those dread
goddesses, stricken with grief at this, vanish into a cleft of the
earth close to the hill, revered by men henceforth as a place for
holy oracles; whilst thou must settle in a city of Arcadia on the
banks of the river Alpheus near the shrine of Lycaean Apollo, and
the city shall be called after thy name. To thee I say this. As for
the corpse of Aegisthus, the citizens of Argos must give it burial;
but Menelaus, who has just arrived at Nauplia from the sack of Troy,
shall bury the, mother, Helen helping him; for she hath come from
her sojourn in Egypt in the halls of Proteus, and hath never been
to Troy; but Zeus, to stir up strife and bloodshed in the world, sent
forth a phantom of Helen to Ilium. Now let Pylades take his maiden
wife and bear her to his home in Achaea; also he must conduct thy
so-called kinsman to the land of Phocis, and there reward him well.
But go thyself along the narrow Isthmus, and seek Cecropia's happy
home. For once thou hast fulfilled the doom appointed for this murder,
thou shalt be blest and free from all thy troubles.  (The remaining
lines of the play are chanted.)  

CHORUS Ye sons of Zeus, may we draw near to speak with you?

DIOSCURI Ye may, since ye are not polluted by this murder.

ORESTES May I too share your converse, of Tyndareus? 

DIOSCURI Thou too! for to Phoebus will I ascribe this deed of blood.

CHORUS How was it that ye, the brothers of the murdered woman, gods
too, did not ward the doom-goddesses from her roof? 

DIOSCURI 'Twas fate that brought resistless doom to her, and that
thoughtless oracle that Phoebus gave. 

ELECTRA But why did the god, and wherefore did his oracles make me
my mother's murderer? 

DIOSCURI A share in the deed, a share in its doom; one ancestral
curse hath ruined both of you. 

ORESTES Ah, sister mine! at last I see thee again only to be robbed
in moment of thy dear love; I must leave thee, and by thee be left.

DIOSCURI Hers are a husband and a home; her only suffering this,
that she is quitting Argos. 

ORESTES Yet what could call forth deeper grief than exile from one's
fatherland? I must leave my father's house, and at a stranger's bar
he sentenced for my mother's blood. 

DIOSCURI Be of good cheer; go to the holy town of Pallas; keep a
stout heart only. 

ELECTRA O my brother, best and dearest! clasp me to thy breast; for
now is the curse of our mother's blood cutting us off from the home
of our fathers. 

ORESTES Throw thy arms in close embrace about me. Oh! weep as o'er
my grave when I am dead. 

DIOSCURI Ah me, that bitter cry makes even gods shudder to hear.
Yea, for in my breast and in every heavenly being's dwells pity for
the sorrows of mankind. 

ORESTES Never to see thee more! 

ELECTRA Never again to stand within thy sight! 

ORESTES This is my last good-bye to thee. 

ELECTRA Farewell, farewell, my city! and ye my fellow-countrywomen,
long farewell to you! 

ORESTES Art thou going already, truest of thy sex? 

ELECTRA I go, the tear-drop dimming my tender eyes. 

ORESTES Go, Pylades, and be happy; take and wed Electra.

DIOSCURI Their only thoughts will be their marriage; but haste thee
to Athens, seeking to escape these hounds of hell, for they are on
thy track in fearful wise, swart monsters, with snakes for hands,
who reap a harvest of man's agony. But we twain must haste away o'er
the Sicilian main to save the seaman's ship. Yet as we fly through
heaven's expanse we help not the wicked; but whoso in his life loves
piety and justice, all such we free from troublous toils and save.
Wherefore let no man be minded to act unjustly, or with men foresworn
set sail; such the warning I, a god, to mortals give.  (THE DIOSCURI
vanish.)  

CHORUS Farewell! truly that mortal's is a happy lot, who can thus
fare, unafflicted by any woe. 

THEEND

 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before AGAMEMNON'S tent in the Greek camp upon the shore of the Thracian
Chersonese. The GHOST OF POLYDORUS appears.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

GHOST Lo! I am come from out the charnel-house and gates of gloom,
where Hades dwells apart from gods, I Polydorus, a son of Hecuba the
daughter of Cisseus and of Priam. Now my father, when Phrygia's capital
was threatened with destruction by the spear of Hellas, took alarm
and conveyed me secretly from the land of Troy unto Polymestor's house,
his friend in Thrace, who sows these fruitful plains of Chersonese,
curbing by his might a nation delighting in horses. And with me my
father sent great store of gold by stealth, that, if ever Ilium's
walls should fall, his children that survived might not want for means
to live. I was the youngest of Priam's sons; and this it was that
caused my stealthy removal from the land; for my childish arm availed
not to carry weapons or to wield the spear. So long then as the bulwarks
of our land stood firm, and Troy's battlements abode unshaken, and
my brother Hector prospered in his warring, I, poor child, grew up
and flourished, like some vigorous shoot, at the court of the Thracian,
my father's friend. But when Troy fell and Hector lost his life and
my father's hearth was rooted up, and himself fell butchered at the
god-built altar by the hands of Achilles' murderous son; then did
my father's friend slay me his helpless guest for the sake of the
gold, and thereafter cast me into the swell of the sea, to keep the
gold for himself in his house. And there I lie one time upon the strand,
another in the salt sea's surge, drifting ever up and down upon the
billows, unwept, unburied; but now am I hovering o'er the head of
my dear mother Hecuba, a disembodied spirit, keeping my airy station
these three days, ever since my poor mother came from Troy to linger
here in Chersonese. Meantime all the Achaeans sit idly here in their
ships at the shores of Thrace; for the son of Peleus, even Achilles,
appeared above his tomb and stayed the whole host of Hellas, as they
were making straight for home across the sea, demanding to have my
sister Polyxena offered at his tomb, and to receive his guerdon. And
he will obtain this prize, nor will they that are his friends refuse
the gift; and on this very day is fate leading my sister to her doom.
So will my mother see two children dead at once, me and that ill-fated
maid. For I, to win a grave, ah me! will appear amid the rippling
waves before her bond-maid's feet. Yes! I have won this boon from
the powers below, that I should find tomb and fall into my mother's
hands; so shall I get my heart's desire; wherefore I will go and waylay
aged Hecuba, for yonder she passeth on her way from the shelter of
Agamemnon's tent, terrified at my spectre. Woe is thee! ah, mother
mine! from a palace dragged to face a life of slavery! how sad thy
lot, as sad as once 'twas blest! Some god is now destroying thee,
setting this in the balance to outweigh thy former bliss.  (The GHOST
vanishes. HECUBA enters from the tent of AGAMEMNON, supported by her
attendants, captive Trojan women.)  

HECUBA  (chanting) Guide these aged steps, my servants, forth before
the house; support your fellow-slave, your queen of yore, ye maids
of Troy. Take hold upon my aged hand, support me, guide me, lift me
up; and I will lean upon your bended arm as on a staff and quicken
my halting footsteps onwards. O dazzling light of Zeus! O gloom of
night! why am I thus scared by fearful visions of the night? O earth,
dread queen, mother of dreams that flit on sable wings! I am seeking
to avert the vision of the night, the sight of horror which I saw
so clearly in my dreams touching my son, who is safe in Thrace, and
Polyxena my daughter dear. Ye gods of this land! preserve my son,
the last and only anchor of my house, now settled in Thrace, the land
of snow, safe in the keeping of his father's friend. Some fresh disaster
is in store, a new strain of sorrow will be added to our woe. Such
ceaseless thrills of terror never wrung my heart before. Oh! where,
ye Trojan maidens, can I find inspired Helenus or Cassandra, that
they may read me my dream? For I saw a dappled hind mangled by a wolf's
bloody fangs, torn from my knees by force in piteous wise. And this
too filled me with affright; o'er the summit of his tomb appeared
Achilles' phantom, and for his guerdon he would have one of the luckless
maids of Troy. Wherefore, I implore you, powers divine, avert this
horror from my daughter, from my child.  (The CHORUS OF CAPTIVE TROJAN
WOMEN enters.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Hecuba, I have hastened away to thee, leaving my
master's tent, where the lot assigned me as his appointed slave, in
the day that was driven from the city of Ilium, hunted by Achaeans
thence at the point of the spear; no alleviation bring I for thy sufferings;
nay have laden myself with heavy news, and am a herald of sorrow to
thee, lady. 'Tis said the Achaeans have determined in full assembly
to offer thy daughter in sacrifice to Achilles; for thou knowest how
one day he appeared standing on his tomb in golden harness, and stayed
the sea-borne barques, though they had their sails already hoisted,
with this pealing cry, "Whither away so fast, ye Danai, leaving my
tomb without its prize?" Thereon arose a violent dispute with stormy
altercation, and opinion was divided in the warrior host of Hellas,
some being in favour of offering the sacrifice at the tomb, others
dissenting. There was Agamemnon, all eagerness in thy interest, because
of his love for the frenzied prophetess; but the two sons of Theseus,
scions of Athens, though supporting different proposals, yet agreed
on the same decision, which was to crown Achilles' tomb with fresh-spilt
blood; for they said they never would set Cassandra's love before
Achilles' valour. Now the zeal of the rival disputants was almost
equal, until that shifty, smooth-mouthed varlet, the son of Laertes,
whose tongue is ever at the service of the mob, persuaded the army
not to put aside the best of all the Danai for want of a bond-maid's
sacrifice, nor have it said by any of the dead that stand beside Persephone,
"The Danai have left the plains of Troy without one thought of gratitude
for their brethren who died for Hellas." Odysseus will be here in
an instant, to drag the tender maiden from thy breast and tear her
from thy aged arms. To the temples, to the altars with thee! at Agamemnon's
knees throw thyself as a suppliant! Invoke alike the gods in heaven
and those beneath the earth. For either shall thy prayers avail to
spare thee the loss of thy unhappy child, or thou must live to see
thy daughter fall before the tomb, her crimson blood spurting in deep
dark jets from her neck with gold encircled.  (THE following lines
between HECUBA and POLYXENA are chanted responsively.)  

HECUBA Woe, woe is me! What words, or cries, or lamentations can
I utter? Ah me! for the sorrows of my closing years! for slavery too
cruel to brook or bear! Woe, woe is me! What champion have I? Sons,
and city-where are they? Aged Priam is no more; no more my children
now. Which way am I to go, or this or that? Whither shall I turn my
steps? Where is any god or power divine to succour me? Ah, Trojan
maids! bringers of evil tidings! messengers of woe! ye have made an
end, an utter end of me; life on earth has no more charm for me. Ah!
luckless steps, lead on, guide your aged mistress to yon tent.  (calling)
My child, come forth; come forth, thou daughter of the queen of sorrows;
listen to thy mother's voice, my child, that thou mayst know the hideous
rumour I now hear about thy life.  (POLYXENA enters from the tent.)

POLYXENA O mother, mother mine! why dost thou call so loud? what
news is it thou hast proclaimed, scaring me, like a cowering bird,
from my chamber by this alarm? 

HECUBA Alas, my daughter! 

POLYXENA Why this ominous address? it bodeth sorrow for me.

HECUBA Woe for thy life! 

POLYXENA Tell all, hide it no longer. Ah mother! how I dread, ay
dread the import of thy loud laments. 

HECUBA Ah my daughter! a luckless mother's child! 

POLYXENA Why dost thou tell me this? 

HECUBA The Argives with one consent are eager for thy sacrifice to
the son of Peleus at his tomb. 

POLYXENA Ah! mother mine! how canst thou speak of such a horror?
Yet tell me all, yes all, O mother dear! 

HECUBA 'Tis a rumour ill-boding I tell, my child; they bring me word
that sentence is passed upon thy life by the Argives' vote.

POLYXENA Alas, for thy cruel sufferings! my persecuted mother! woe
for thy life of grief! What grievous outrage some fiend hath sent
on thee, hateful, horrible! No more shall I thy daughter share thy
bondage, hapless youth on hapless age attending. For thou, alas! wilt
see thy hapless child torn from thy arms, as a calf of the hills is
torn from its mother, and sent beneath the darkness of the earth with
severed throat for Hades, where with the dead shall I be laid, ah
me! For thee I weep with plaintive wail, mother doomed to a life of
sorrow! for my own life, its ruin and its outrage, never a tear I
shed; nay, death is become to me a happier lot than life.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS See where Odysseus comes in haste, to announce
some fresh command to thee, Hecuba.  (ODYSSEUS enters, with his attendants.)

ODYSSEUS Lady, methinks thou knowest already the intention of the
host, and the vote that has been passed; still will I declare it.
It is the Achaeans' will to sacrifice thy daughter Polyxena at the
mound heaped o'er Achilles' grave; and they appoint me to take the
maid and bring her thither, while the son of Achilles is chosen to
preside o'er the sacrifice and act as priest. Dost know then what
to do? Be not forcibly torn from her, nor match thy might 'gainst
mine; recognize the limits of thy strength, and the presence of thy
troubles. Even in adversity 'tis wise to yield to reason's dictates.

HECUBA Ah me! an awful trial is nigh, it seems, fraught with mourning,
rich in tears. Yes, I too escaped death where death had been my due,
and Zeus destroyed me not but is still preserving my life, that I
may witness in my misery fresh sorrows surpassing all before. Still
if the bond may ask the free of things that grieve them not nor wrench
their heart-strings, 'tis well that thou shouldst make an end and
hearken to my questioning. 

ODYSSEUS Granted; put thy questions; that short delay I grudge thee
not. 

HECUBA Dost remember the day thou camest to spy on Ilium, disguised
in rags and tatters, while down thy cheek ran drops of blood?

ODYSSEUS Remember it! yes; 'twas no slight impression it made upon
my heart. 

HECUBA Did Helen recognize thee and tell me only? 

ODYSSEUS I well remember the awful risk I ran. 

HECUBA Didst thou embrace my knees in all humility? 

ODYSSEUS Yea, so that my hand grew dead and cold upon thy robe.

HECUBA What saidst thou then, when in my power? 

ODYSSEUS Doubtless I found plenty to say, to save my life.

HECUBA Was it I that saved and sent thee forth again? 

ODYSSEUS Thou didst, and so I still behold the light of day.

HECUBA Art not thou then playing a sorry part to plot against me
thus, after the kind treatment thou didst by thy own confession receive
from me, showing me no gratitude but all the ill thou canst? A thankless
race! all ye who covet honour from the mob for your oratory. Oh that
ye were unknown to me ye who harm your friends and think no more of
it, if ye can but say a word to win the mob. But tell me, what kind
of cleverness did they think it, when against this child they passed
their bloody vote? Was it duty led them to slay a human victim at
the tomb, where sacrifice of oxen more befits? or does Achilles, if
claiming the lives of those who slew him as his recompense, show his
justice by marking her out for death? No! she at least ne'er injured
him. He should have demanded Helen as a victim at his tomb, for she
it was that proved his ruin, bringing him to Troy; or if some captive
of surpassing beauty was to be singled out for doom, this pointed
not to us; for the daughter of Tyndareus was fairer than all womankind,
and her injury to him was proved no les than ours. Against the justice
of his plea I pit this argument. Now hear the recompense due from
thee to me at my request. On thy own confession, thou didst fall at
my feet and embrace my hand and aged cheek; I in my turn now do the
same to thee, and claim the favour then bestowed; and I implore thee,
tear not my child from my arms, nor slay her. There be dead enough;
she is my only joy, in her I forget my sorrows; My one comfort she
in place of many a loss, my city and my nurse, my staff and journey's
guide. 'Tis never right that those in power should use it out of season,
or when prosperous suppose they will be always so. For I like them
was prosperous once, but now my life is lived, and one day robbed
me of all my bliss. Friend, by thy beard, have some regard and pity
for me; go to Achaea's host, and talk them over, saying how hateful
a thing it is to slay women whom at first ye spared out of pity, after
dragging them from the altars. For amongst you the self-same law holds
good for bond and free alike respecting bloodshed; such influence
as thine will persuade them even though thy words are weak; for the
same argument, when proceeding from those of no account, has not the
same force as when it is uttered by men of mark. 

LEADER Human nature is not so stony-hearted as to hear thy plaintive
tale and catalogue of sorrows, without shedding a tear. 

ODYSSEUS O Hecuba! be schooled by me, nor in thy passion count him
a foe who speaketh wisely. Thy life I am prepared to save, for the
service I received; I say no otherwise. But what I said to all, I
will not now deny, that after Troy's capture I would give thy daughter
to the chiefest of our host because he asked a victim. For herein
is a source of weakness to most states, whene'er a man of brave and
generous soul receives no greater honour than his inferiors. Now Achilles,
lady, deserves honour at our hands, since for Hellas he died as nobly
as a mortal can. Is not this a foul reproach to treat a man as a friend
in life, but, when he is gone from us, to treat him so no more? How
now? what will they say, if once more there comes gathering of the
host and a contest with the foe? "Shall we fight or nurse our lives,
seeing the dead have no honours?" For myself, indeed, though in life
my daily store were scant, yet would it be all-sufficient, but as
touching a tomb I should wish mine to be an object of respect, for
this gratitude has long to run. Thou speakest of cruel sufferings;
hear my answer. Amongst us are aged dames and grey old men no less
miserable than thou, and brides of gallant husbands reft, o'er whom
this Trojan dust has closed. Endure these sorrows; for us, if we are
wrong in resolving to honour the brave, we shall bring upon ourselves
a charge of ignorance; but as for you barbarians, regard not your
friends as such and pay no homage to your gallant dead, that Hellas
may prosper and ye may reap the fruits of such policy. 

LEADER Alas! how cursed is slavery alway in its nature, forced by
the might of the stronger to endure unseemly treatment. 

HECUBA Daughter, my pleading to avert thy bloody death was wasted
idly on the air; do thou, if in aught endowed with greater power to
move than thy mother, make haste to use it, uttering every pleading
note like the tuneful nightingale, to save thy soul from death. Throw
thyself at Odysseus' knees to move his pity, and try to move him.
Here is thy plea: he to hath children, so that he can feel for thy
sad fate. 

POLYXENA Odysseus, I see thee hiding thy right hand beneath thy robe
and turning away thy face, that I may not touch thy beard. Take heart;
thou art safe from the suppliant's god in my case, for I will follow
thee, alike because I must and because it is my wish to die; for were
I loth, a coward should I show myself, a woman faint of heart. Why
should I prolong my days? I whose sire was king of all the Phrygians?-my
chiefest pride in life, Then was I nursed on fair fond hopes to be
a bride for kings, the centre of keen jealousy amongst suitors, to
see whose home I would make my own; and o'er each dame of Ida I was
queen; ah me! a maiden marked amid her fellows, equal to a goddess,
save for death alone, but now slave! That name first makes me long
for death, so strange it sounds; and then maybe my lot might give
me to some savage master, one that would buy me for money,-me the
sister of Hector and many another chief,-who would make me knead him
bread within his halls, or sweep his house or set me working at the
loom, leading a life of misery; while some slave, bought I know not
whence, will taint my maiden charms, once deemed worthy of royalty.
No, never! Here I close my eyes upon the light, free as yet, and dedicate
myself to Hades. Lead me hence, Odysseus, and do thy worst, for I
see naught within my reach to make me hope or expect with any confidence
that I am ever again to be happy. Mother mine! seek not to hinder
me by word or deed, but join in my wish for death ere I meet with
shameful treatment undeserved. For whoso is not used to taste of sorrow's
cup, though he bears it, yet it galls him when he puts his neck within
the yoke; far happier would he be dead than alive, for life of honour
reft is toil and trouble. 

LEADER A wondrous mark, most clearly stamped, doth noble birth imprint
on men, and the name goeth still further where it is deserved.

HECUBA A noble speech, my daughter! but there is sorrow linked with
its noble sentiments. 

Odysseus, if ye must pleasure the son of Peleus, and avoid reproach,
slay not this maid, but lead me to Achilles' pyre and torture me unsparingly:
'twas I that bore Paris, whose fatal shaft laid low the son of Thetis.

ODYSSEUS 'Tis not thy death, old dame, Achilles' wraith hath demanded
of the Achaeans, but hers. 

HECUBA At least then slaughter me with my child; so shall there be
a double draught of blood for the earth and the dead that claims this
sacrifice. 

ODYSSEUS The maiden's death suffices; no need to add a second to
the first; would we needed not e'en this! 

HECUBA Die with my daughter I must and will. 

ODYSSEUS How so? I did not know I had a master. 

HECUBA I will cling to her like ivy to an oak. 

ODYSSEUS Not if thou wilt hearken to those who are wiser than thyself.

HECUBA Be sure I will never willingly relinquish my child.

ODYSSEUS Well, be equally sure I will never go away and leave her
here. 

POLYXENA Mother, hearken to me; and thou, son of Laertes, make allowance
for a parent's natural wrath. My poor mother, fight not with our masters.
Wilt thou be thrown down, be roughly thrust aside and wound thy aged
skin, and in unseemly wise be torn from me by youthful arms? This
wilt thou suffer; do not so, for 'tis not right for thee. Nay, dear
mother mine give me thy hand beloved, and let me press thy cheek to
mine; for never, nevermore, but now for the last time shall I behold
the dazzling sun-god's orb. My last farewells now take! O mother,
mother mine! beneath the earth I pass. 

HECUBA O my daughter, I am still to live and be a slave.

POLYXENA Unwedded I depart, never having tasted the married joys
that were my due! 

HECUBA Thine, my daughter, is a piteous lot, and sad is mine also.

POLYXENA There in Hades' courts shall I be laid apart from thee.

HECUBA Ah me, what shall I do? where shall I end my life?

POLYXENA Daughter of a free-born sire, a slave I am to die.

HECUBA Not one of all my fifty children left! 

POLYXENA What message can I take for thee to Hector or thy aged lord?

HECUBA Tell them that of all women I am the most miserable.

POLYXENA Ah! bosom and breasts that fed me with sweet food!

HECUBA Woe is thee, my child, for this untimely fate! 

POLYXENA Farewell, my mother! farewell, Cassandra! 

HECUBA "Fare well!" others do, but not thy mother, no! 

POLYXENA Thou too, my brother Polydorus, who art in Thrace, the home
of steeds! 

HECUBA Aye, if he lives, which much I doubt; so luckless am I every
way. 

POLYXENA Oh yes, he lives; and, when thou diest, he will close thine
eyes. 

HECUBA I am dead; sorrow has forestalled death here. 

POLYXENA Come veil my head, Odysseus, and take me hence; for now,
ere falls the fatal blow, my heart is melted by my mother's wailing,
and hers no less by mine. O light of day! for still may I call thee
by thy name, though now my share in thee is but the time I take to
go 'twixt this and the sword at Achilles' tomb.  (ODYSSEUS and his
attendants lead POLYXENA away.)  

HECUBA Woe is me! I faint; my limbs sink under me. O my daughter,
embrace thy mother, stretch out thy hand, give it me again; leave
me not childless! Ah, friends! 'tis my death-blow. Oh! to see that
Spartan woman, Helen, sister of the sons of Zeus, in such a plight;
for her bright eyes have caused the shameful fall of Troy's once prosperous
town.  (HECUBA sinks fainting to the ground.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

O breeze from out the deep arising, that waftest swift galleys, ocean's
coursers, across the surging main! whither wilt thou bear me the child
of sorrow? To whose house shall I be brought, to be his slave and
chattel? to some haven in the Dorian land, or in Phthia, where men
say Apidanus, father of fairest streams, makes fat and rich the tilth?

(antistrophe 1)

or to an island home, sent on a voyage of misery by oars that sweep
the brine, leading a wretched existence in halls where the first-created
palm and the bay-tree put forth their sacred shoots for dear Latona,
memorial fair of her divine travail? and there with the maids of Delos
shall I hymn the golden snood and bow of Artemis their goddess?

(strophe 2)

Or in the city of Pallas, the home of Athena of the beauteous chariot,
shall I upon her saffron robe yoke horses to the car, embroidering
them on my web in brilliant varied shades, or the race of Titans,
whom Zeus the son of Cronos lays to their unending sleep with bolt
of flashing flame? 

(antistrophe 2)

Woe is me for my children! woe for my ancestors, and my country which
is falling in smouldering ruin 'mid the smoke, sacked by the Argive
spear! while I upon a foreign shore am called a slave for-sooth, leaving
Asia, Europe's handmaid, and receiving in its place deadly marriage-bower.
(The herald, TALTHYBIUS, enters.)  

TALTHYBIUS Where can I find Hecuba, who once was queen of Ilium,
ye Trojan maidens? 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS There she lies near thee, Talthybius, stretched
full length upon the ground, wrapt in her robe. 

TALTHYBIUS Great Zeus! what can I say? that thine eye is over man?
or that we hold this false opinion all to no purpose, thinking there
is any race of gods, when it is chance that rules the mortal sphere?
Was not this the queen of wealthy Phrygia, the wife of Priam highly
blest? And now her city is utterly o'erthrown by the foe, and she,
a slave in her old age, her children dead, lies stretched upon the
ground, soiling her hair, poor lady in the dust. Well, well; old as
I am, may death be my lot before I am caught in any foul mischance.
Arise, poor queen! lift up thyself and raise that hoary head.

HECUBA  (stirring) Ah! who art thou that wilt not let my body rest?
why disturb me in my anguish, whosoe'er thou art? 

TALTHYBIUS 'Tis I, Talthybius, who am here, the minister of the Danai;
Agamemnon has sent me for thee, lady. 

HECUBA  (rising) Good friend, art come because the Achaeans are resolved
to slay me to at the grave? How welcome would thy tidings be! Let
us hasten and lose no time; prithee, lead the way, old sir.

TALTHYBIUS I am come to fetch thee to bury thy daughter's corpse,
lady; and those that send me are the two sons of Atreus and the Achaean
host. 

HECUBA Ah! what wilt thou say? Art thou not come, as I had thought,
to fetch me to my doom, but to announce ill news? Lost, lost, my child!
snatched from thy mother's arms! and I am childless now, at least
as touches thee; ah, woe is me! 

How did ye end her life? was any mercy shown? or did ye deal ruthlessly
with her as though your victim were a foe, old man? Speak, though
thy words must be pain to me. 

TALTHYBIUS Lady, thou art bent on making mine a double meed of tears
in pity for thy child; for now too as I tell the sad tale a tear will
wet my eye, as it did at the tomb when she was dying. 

All Achaea's host was gathered there in full array before the tomb
to see thy daughter offered; and the son of Achilles took Polyxena
by the hand and set her on the top of the mound, while I stood near;
and a chosen band of young Achaeans followed to hold thy child and
prevent her struggling. Then did Achilles' son take in his hands a
brimming cup of gold and poured an offering to his dead sire, making
a sign to me to proclaim silence throughout the Achaean host. So I
stood at his side and in their midst proclaimed, "Silence, ye Achaeans!
hushed be the people all! peace! be still! "Therewith I hushed the
host. Then spake he, "Son of Peleus, father mine, accept the offering
I pour thee to appease thy spirit, strong to raise the dead; and come
to drink the black blood of a virgin pure, which I and the host are
offering thee; oh! be propitious to us; grant that we may loose our
prows and the cables of our ships, and, meeting with prosperous voyage
from Ilium, all to our country come." So he; and all the army echoed
his prayer. Then seizing his golden sword by the hilt he drew it from
its scabbard, signing the while to the picked young Argive warriors
to hold the maid. But she, when she was ware thereof, uttered her
voice and said: "O Argives, who have sacked my city! of my free will
I die; let none lay hand on me; for bravely will I yield my neck.
Leave me free, I do beseech; so slay me, that death may find me free;
for to be called a slave amongst the dead fills my royal heart with
shame." Thereat the people shouted their applause, and king Agamemnon
bade the young men loose the maid. So they set her free, as soon as
they heard this last command from him whose might was over all. And
she, hearing her captors' words took her robe and tore it open from
the shoulder to the waist, displaying a breast and bosom fair as a
statue's; then sinking on her knee, one word she spake more piteous
than all the rest, "Young prince, if 'tis my breast thou'dst strike,
lo! here it is, strike home! or if at my neck thy sword thou'lt aim,
behold! that neck is bared." 

Then he, half glad, half sorry in his pity for the maid, cleft with
the steel the channels of her breath, and streams of blood gushed
forth; but she, e'en in death's agony, took good heed to fall with
maiden grace, hiding from gaze of man what modest maiden must. Soon
as she had breathed her last through the fatal gash, each Argive set
his hand to different tasks, some strewing leaves o'er the corpse
in handfuls, others bringing pine-logs and heaping up a pyre; and
he, who brought nothing, would hear from him who did such taunts as
these, "Stand'st thou still, ignoble wretch, with never a robe or
ornament to bring for the maiden? Wilt thou give naught to her that
showed such peerless bravery and spirit?" 

Such is the tale I tell about thy daughter's death, and I regard thee
as blest beyond all mothers in thy noble child, yet crossed in fortune
more than all. 

LEADER Upon the race of Priam and my city some fearful curse hath
burst; 'tis sent by God, and we must bear it. 

HECUBA O my daughter! 'mid this crowd of sorrows I know not where
to turn my gaze; for if I set myself to one, another will not give
me pause; while from this again a fresh grief summons me, finding
a successor to sorrow's throne. No longer now can I efface from my
mind the memory of thy sufferings sufficiently to stay my tears; yet
hath the story of thy noble death taken from the keenness of my grief.
Is it not then strange that poor land, when blessed by heaven with
a lucky year, yields a good crop, while that which is good, if robbed
of needful care, bears but little increase; yet 'mongst men the knave
is never other than a knave, the good man aught but good, never changing
for the worse because of misfortune, but ever the same? Is then the
difference due to birth or bringing up? Good training doubtless gives
lessons in good conduct, and if a man have mastered this, he knows
what is base by the standard of good. Random shafts of my soul's shooting
these, I know.  (To TALTHYBIUS)  Go thou and proclaim to the Argives
that they touch not my daughter's body but keep the crowd away. For
when countless host is gathered, the mob knows no restraint, and the
unruliness of sailors exceeds that of fire, all abstinence from evil
being counted evil.  (TALTHYBIUS goes out., Addressing a servant)
My aged handmaid, take a pitcher and dip it in the salt sea and bring
hither thereof, that I for the last time may wash my child, a virgin
wife, a widowed maid, and lay her out,-as she deserves, ah! whence
can I? impossible! but as best I can; and what will that be? I will
collect adornment from the captives, my companions in these tents,
if haply any of them escaping her master's eye have some secret store
from her old home.  (The MAID departs.)  O towering halls, O home
so happy once, O Priam, rich in store of fairest wealth, most blest
of sires, and I no less, the grey-haired mother of thy race, how are
we brought to naught, stripped of our former pride! And spite of all
we vaunt ourselves, one on the riches of his house, another be, cause
he has an honoured name amongst his fellow-citizens! But these things
are naught; in vain are all our thoughtful schemes, in vain our vaunting
words. He is happiest who meets no sorrow in his daily walk.  (HECUBA
enters the tent.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Woe and tribulation were made my lot in life, soon as ever Paris
felled his beams of pine in Ida's woods, to sail across the heaving
main in quest of Helen's hand, fairest bride on whom the sun-god turns
his golden eye. 

(antistrophe)

For here beginneth trouble's cycle, and, worse than that, relentless
fate; and from one man's folly came a universal curse, bringing death
to the land of Simois, with trouble from an alien shore. The strife
the shepherd decided on Ida 'twixt three daughters of the blessed
gods, 

(epode)

brought as its result war and bloodshed and the ruin of my home;
and many a Spartan maiden too is weeping bitter tears in her halls
on the banks of fair Eurotas, and many a mother whose sons are slain,
is smiting her hoary head and tearing her cheeks, making her nails
red in the furrowed gash. 

MAID (entering excitedly, attended by bearers bringing in a covered
corpse) Oh! where, ladies, is Hecuba, our queen of sorrow, who far
surpasses all in tribulation, men and women both alike? None shall
wrest the crown from her. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS What now, thou wretched bird of boding note?
Thy evil tidings never seem to rest. 

MAID 'Tis to Hecuba I bring my bitter news; no easy task is it for
mortal lips to speak smooth words in sorrow's hour. 

LEADER Lo! she is coming even now from the shelter of the tent appearing
just in time to hear thee speak.  (HECUBA comes out of the tent.)

MAID Alas for thee! most hapless queen, ruined beyond all words of
mine to tell; robbed of the light of life; of children, husband, city
reft; hopelessly undone! 

HECUBA This is no news but insult; I have heard it all before. But
why art thou come, bringing hither to me the corpse of Polyxena, on
whose burial Achaea's host was reported to be busily engaged?

MAID  (aside) She little knows what I have to tell, but mourns Polyxena,
not grasping her new sorrows. 

HECUBA Ah! woe is me! thou art not surely bringing hither mad Cassandra,
the prophetic maid? 

MAID She lives, of whom thou speakest; but the dead thou dost not
weep is here.  (Uncovering the corpse)  Mark well the body now laid
bare; is not this a sight to fill thee with wonder, and upset thy
hopes? 

HECUBA Ah me! 'tis the corpse of my son Polydorus I behold, whom
he of Thrace was keeping safe for me in his halls. Alas! this is the
end of all; my life is o'er.  (Chanting)  O my son, my son, alas for
thee! a frantic strain I now begin; thy fate I learnt, a moment gone,
from some foul fiend. 

MAID What! so thou knewest thy son's fate, poor lady. 

HECUBA  (chanting) I cannot, cannot credit this fresh sight I see.
Woe succeeds to woe; time will never cease henceforth to bring me
groans and tears. 

LEADER Alas poor lady, our sufferings are cruel indeed.

HECUBA  (chanting) O my son, child of a luckless mother, what was
the manner of thy death? what lays thee dead at my feet? Who did the
deed? 

MAID I know not. On the sea-shore I found him. 

HECUBA  (chanting) Cast up on the smooth sand, or thrown there after
the murderous blow? 

MAID The waves had washed him ashore. 

HECUBA  (chanting) Alas! alas! I read aright the vision I saw in
my sleep, nor did the phantom dusky-winged escape my ken, even the
vision I saw concerning my son, who is now no more within the bright
sunshine. 

LEADER Who slew him then? Can thy dream-lore tell us that?

HECUBA  (chanting) 'Twas my own, own friend, the knight of Thrace,
with whom his aged sire had placed the boy in hiding. 

LEADER O horror! what wilt thou say? did he slay him to get the gold?

HECUBA  (chanting) O awful crime! O deed without a name! beggaring
wonder! impious! intolerable! Where are now the laws 'twixt guest
and host? Accursed monster! how hast thou mangled his flesh, slashing
the poor child's limbs with ruthless sword, lost to all sense of pity!

LEADER Alas for thee! how some deity, whose hand is heavy on thee,
hath sent thee troubles beyond all other mortals! But yonder I see
our lord and master Agamemnon coming; so let us be still henceforth,
my friends.  (AGAMEMNON enters.)  

AGAMEMNON Hecuba, why art thou delaying to come and bury thy daughter?
for it was for this that Talthybius brought me thy message begging
that none of the Argives should touch thy child. And so I granted
this, and none is touching her, but this long delay of thine fills
me with wonder. Wherefore am I come to send thee hence; for our part
there is well performed; if herein there be any place for "well."
(He sees the body.)  Ha! what man is this I see near the tents, some
Trojan's corpse? 'tis not an Argive's body; that the garments it is
clad in tell me. 

HECUBA  (aside) Unhappy one! in naming thee I name myself; O Hecuba,
what shall do? throw myself here at Agamemnon's knees, or bear my
sorrows in silence? 

AGAMEMNON Why dost thou turn thy back towards me and weep, refusing
to say, what has happened, or who this is? 

HECUBA  (aside) But should he count me as a slave and foe and spurn
me from his knees, I should but add to my anguish. 

AGAMEMNON I am no prophet born; wherefore, if I be not told, I cannot
learn the current of thy thoughts. 

HECUBA  (aside) Can it be that in estimating this man's feelings
I make him out too ill-disposed, when he is not really so?

AGAMEMNON If thy wish really is that I should remain in ignorance,
we are of one mind; for I have no wish myself to listen.

HECUBA  (aside) Without his aid I shall not be able to avenge my
children. Why do still ponder the matter? I must do and dare whether
I win or lose.  (Turning to AGAMEMNON)  O Agamemnon! by thy knees,
by thy beard and conquering hand I implore thee. 

AGAMEMNON What is thy desire? to be set free? that is easily done.

HECUBA Not that; give me vengeance on the wicked, and evermore am
I willing to lead a life of slavery. 

AGAMEMNON Well, but why dost thou call me to thy aid? 

HECUBA 'Tis a matter thou little reckest of, O king. Dost see this
corpse, for whom my tears now flow? 

AGAMEMNON I do; but what is to follow, I cannot guess. 

HECUBA He was my child in days gone by; I bore him in my womb.

AGAMEMNON Which of thy sons is he, poor sufferer? 

HECUBA Not one of Priam's race who fell 'neath Ilium's walls.

AGAMEMNON Hadst thou any son besides those, lady? 

HECUBA Yes, him thou seest here, of whom, methinks, I have small
gain. 

AGAMEMNON Where then was he, when his city was being destroyed?

HECUBA His father, fearful of his death, conveyed him out of Troy.

AGAMEMNON Where did he place him apart from all the sons he then
had? 

HECUBA Here in this very land, where his corpse was found.

AGAMEMNON With Polymestor, the king of this country? 

HECUBA Hither was he sent in charge of gold, most bitter trust!

AGAMEMNON By whom was he slain? what death o'ertook him?

HECUBA By whom but by this man? His Thracian host slew him.

AGAMEMNON The wretch! could he have been so eager for the treasure?

HECUBA Even so; soon as ever he heard of the Phrygians' disaster.

AGAMEMNON Where didst find him? or did some one bring his corpse?

HECUBA This maid, who chanced upon it on the sea-shore.

AGAMEMNON Was she seeking it, or bent on other tasks? 

HECUBA She had gone to fetch water from the sea to wash Polyxena.

AGAMEMNON It seems then his host slew him and cast his body out to
sea. 

HECUBA Aye, for the waves to toss, after mangling him thus.

AGAMEMNON Woe is thee for thy measureless troubles! 

HECUBA I am ruined; no evil now is left, O Agamemnon. 

AGAMEMNON Look you! what woman was ever born to such misfortune?

HECUBA There is none, unless thou wouldst name misfortune herself.
But hear my reason for throwing myself at thy knees. If my treatment
seems to thee deserved, I will be content; but, if otherwise, help
me to punish this most godless host, that hath wrought a deed most
damned, fearless alike of gods in heaven or hell; who, though full
oft he had shared my board and been counted first of all my guest-friends
and after meeting with every kindness he could claim and receiving
my consideration, slew my son, and bent though he was on murder, deigned
not to bury him but cast his body forth to sea. 

I may be a slave and weak as well, but the gods are strong, and custom
too which prevails o'er them, for by custom it is that we believe
in them and set up bounds of right and wrong for our lives. Now if
this principle, when referred to thee, is to be set at naught, and
they are to escape punishment who murder guests or dare to plunder
the temples of gods, then is all fairness in things human at an end.
Deem this then a disgrace and show regard for me, have pity on me,
and, like an artist standing back from his picture, look on me and
closely scan my piteous state. I was once queen, but now I am thy
slave; a happy mother once, but now childless and old alike, reft
of city, utterly forlorn, the most wretched woman living. Ah! woe
is me! whither wouldst thou withdraw thy steps from me?  (as AGAMEMNON
is turning away)  My efforts then will be in vain, ah me! ah me! Why,
oh! why do we mortals toil, as needs we must, and seek out all other
sciences, but persuasion, the only real mistress of mankind, we take
no furthur pains to master completely by offering to pay for the knowledge,
so that any man might upon occasion convince his fellows as he pleased
and gain his point as well? How shall anyone hereafter hope for prosperity?
All those my sons are gone from me, and I, their mother, am led away
into captivity to suffer shame, while yonder I see the smoke leaping
up o'er my city. Further-though perhaps this were idly urged, to plead
thy love, still will I put the case:-at thy side lies my daughter,
Cassandra, the maid inspired, as the Phrygians call her. How then,
king, wilt thou acknowledge those nights of rapture, or what return
shall she my daughter or I her mother have for all the love she has
lavished on her lord? For from darkness and the endearments of the
night mortals reap by far their keenest joys. Hearken then; dost see
this corpse? By doing him a service thou wilt do it to a kinsman of
thy bride's. One thing only have I yet to urge. Oh! would I had a
voice in arms, in hands, in hair and feet, placed there by the arts
of Daedalus or some god, that all together they might with tears embrace
thy knees, bringing a thousand pleas to bear on thee! O my lord and
master, most glorious light of Hellas, listen, stretch forth a helping
hand to this aged woman, for all she is a thing of naught; still do
so. For 'tis ever a good man's duty to succour the right, and to punish
evil-doers wherever found. 

LEADER 'Tis strange how each extreme doth meet in human life! Custom
determines even our natural ties, making the most bitter foes friends,
and regarding as foes those who formerly were friends. 

AGAMEMNON Hecuba, I feel compassion for thee and thy son and thy
ill-fortune, as well as for thy suppliant gesture, and I would gladly
see yon impious host pay thee this forfeit for the sake of heaven
and justice, could I but find some way to help thee without appearing
to the army to have plotted the death of the Thracian king for Cassandra's
sake. For on one point I am assailed by perplexity; the army count
this man their friend, the dead their foe; that he is dear to thee
is a matter apart, wherein the army has no share. Reflect on this;
for though thou find'st me ready to share thy toil and quick to lend
my aid, yet the risk of being reproached by the Achaeans makes me
hesitate. 

HECUBA Ah! there is not in the world a single man free; for he is
either a slave to money or to fortune, or else the people in their
thousands or the fear of public prosecution prevents him from following
the dictates of his heart. 

But since thou art afraid, deferring too much to the rabble, I will
rid thee of that fear. Thus; be privy to my plot if I devise mischief
against this murderer, but refrain from any share in it. And if there
break out among the Achaeans any uproar or attempt at rescue, when
the Thracian is suffering his doom, check it, though without seeming
to do so for my sake. For what remains, take heart; I will arrange
everything well. 

AGAMEMNON How? what wilt thou do? wilt take a sword in thy old hand
and slay the barbarian, or hast thou drugs or what to help thee? Who
will take thy part? whence wilt thou procure friends? 

HECUBA Sheltered beneath these tents is a host of Trojan women.

AGAMEMNON Dost mean the captives, the booty of the Hellenes?

HECUBA With their help will I punish my murderous foe. 

AGAMEMNON How are women to master men? 

HECUBA Numbers are a fearful thing, and joined to craft a desperate
foe. 

AGAMEMNON True; still I have a mean opinion of the female race.

HECUBA What? did not women slay the sons of Aegyptus, and utterly
clear Lemnos of men? But let it be even thus; put an end to our conference,
and send this woman for me safely through the host. And do thou  (To
servant)  draw near my Thracian friend and say, "Hecuba, once queen
of Ilium, summons thee, on thy own business no less than hers, thy
children too, for they also must hear what she has to say."  (The
servant goes out.)  Defer awhile, Agamemnon, the burial of Polyxena
lately slain, that brother and sister may be laid on the same pyre
and buried side by side, a double cause of sorrow to their mother.

AGAMEMNON So shall it be; yet had the host been able to sail, I could
not have granted thee this boon; but, as it is, since the god sends
forth no favouring breeze, we needs must abide, seeing, as we do,
that sailing cannot be. Good luck to thee! for this is the interest
alike of citizen and state, that the wrong-doer be punished and the
good man prosper.  (AGAMEMNON departs as HECUBA withdraws into the
tent.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

No more, my native Ilium, shalt thou be counted among the towns ne'er
sacked; so thick a cloud of Hellene troops is settling all around,
wasting thee with the spear; shorn art thou of thy coronal of towers,
and fouled most piteously with filthy soot; no more, ah me! shall
tread thy streets. 

(antistrophe 1)

'Twas in the middle of the night my ruin came, in the hour when sleep
steals sweetly o'er the eyes after the feast is done. My husband,
the music o'er, and the sacrifice that sets the dance afoot now ended,
was lying in our bridal-chamber, his spear hung on a peg; with never
a thought of the sailor-throng encamped upon the Trojan shores;

(strophe 2)

and I was braiding my tresses 'neath a tight-drawn snood before my
golden mirror's countless rays, that I might lay me down to rest;
when lo! through the city rose a din, and a cry went ringing down
the streets of Troy, "Ye sons of Hellas, when, oh! when will ye sack
the citadel of Ilium, and seek your homes?" 

(antistrophe 2)

Up sprang I from my bed, with only a mantle about me, like Dorian
maid, and sought in vain, ah me! to station myself at the holy hearth
of Artemis; for, after seeing my husband slain, I was hurried away
o'er the broad sea; with many a backward look at my city, when the
ship began her homeward voyage and parted me from Ilium's strand;
till alas! for very grief I fainted, 

(epode)

cursing Helen the sister of the Dioscuri, and Paris the baleful shepherd
of Ida; for 'twas their marriage, which was no marriage but a curse
by some demon sent, that robbed me of my country and drove me from
my home. Oh! may the sea's salt flood neer carry her home again; and
may she never set foot in her father's halls!  (HECUBA comes out of
the tent as POLYMESTOR, his children and guards enter.)  

POLYMESTOR My dear friend Priam, and thou no less, Hecuba, I weep
to see thee and thy city thus, and thy daughter lately slain. Alas!
there is naught to be relied on; fair fame is insecure, nor is there
any guarantee that weal will not be turned to woe. For the gods confound
our fortunes, tossing them to and fro, and introduce confusion, that
our perplexity may make us worship them. But what boots it to bemoan
these things, when it brings one no nearer to heading the trouble?
If thou art blaming me at all for my absence, stay a moment; I was
away in the very heart of Thrace when thou wast brought hither; but
on my return, just as I was starting from my home for the same purpose,
thy maid fell in with me, and gave me thy message, which brought me
here at once. 

HECUBA Polymestor, I am holden in such wretched plight that I blush
to meet thine eye; for my present evil case makes me ashamed to face
thee who didst see me in happier days, and I cannot look on thee with
unfaltering gaze. Do not then think it ill-will on my part, Polymestor;
there is another cause as well, I mean the custom which forbids women
to meet men's gaze. 

POLYMESTOR No wonder, surely. But what need hast thou of me? Why
didst send for me to come hither from my house? 

HECUBA I wish to tell thee and thy children a private matter of my
own; prithee, bid thy attendants withdraw from the tent.

POLYMESTOR  (to his Attendants) Retire; this desert spot is safe
enough.  (The guards go out; to HECUBA)  Thou art my friend, and this
Achaean host is well-disposed to me. But thou must tell me how prosperity
is to succour its unlucky friends; for ready am I to do so.

HECUBA First tell me of the child Polydorus, whom thou art keeping
in thy halls, received from me and his father; is he yet alive? The
rest will I ask thee after that. 

POLYMESTOR Yes, thou still hast a share in fortune there.

HECUBA Well said, dear friend! how worthy of thee! 

POLYMESTOR What next wouldst learn of me? 

HECUBA Hath he any recollection of me his mother? 

POLYMESTOR Aye, he was longing to steal away hither to thee.

HECUBA Is the gold safe, which he brought with him from Troy?

POLYMESTOR Safe under lock and key in my halls. 

HECUBA There keep it, but covet not thy neighbour's goods.

POLYMESTOR Not I; God grant me luck of what I have, lady!

HECUBA Dost know what I wish to say to thee and thy children?

POLYMESTOR Not yet; thy words maybe will declare it. 

HECUBA May it grow as dear to thee as thou now art to me!

POLYMESTOR What is it that I and my children are to learn?

HECUBA There be ancient vaults filled full of gold by Priam's line.

POLYMESTOR Is it this thou wouldst tell thy son? 

HECUBA Yes, by thy lips, for thou art a righteous man. 

POLYMESTOR What need then of these children's presence?

HECUBA 'Tis better they should know it, in case of thy death.

POLYMESTOR True; 'tis also the wiser way. 

HECUBA Well, dost thou know where stands the shrine of Trojan Athena?

POLYMESTOR Is the gold there? what is there to mark it?

HECUBA A black rock rising above the ground. 

POLYMESTOR Is there aught else thou wouldst tell me about the place?

HECUBA I wish to keep safe the treasure I brought from Troy.

POLYMESTOR Where can it be? inside thy dress, or hast thou it hidden?

HECUBA 'Tis safe amid a heap of spoils within these tents.

POLYMESTOR Where? This is the station built by the Achaeans to surround
their fleet. 

HECUBA The captive women have huts of their own. 

POLYMESTOR It is safe to enter? are there no men about?

HECUBA There are no Achaeans within; we are alone. Enter then the
tent, for the Argives are eager to set sail from Troy for home; and,
when thou hast accomplished all that is appointed thee, thou shalt
return with thy children to that bourn where thou hast lodged my son.
(HECUBA leads POLYMESTOR and his children into the tent.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Not yet hast thou paid the penalty, but maybe
thou yet wilt; like one who slips and falls into the surge with no
haven near, so shalt thou lose thy own life for the life thou hast
taken. For where the rights of justice and the law of heaven are one,
there is ruin fraught with death and doom. Thy hopes of this journey
shall cheat thee, for it hath led thee, unhappy wretch! to the halls
of death; and to no warrior's hand shalt thou resign thy life.

POLYMESTOR  (within the tent) O horror! I am blinded of the light
of my eyes, ah me! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Heard ye, friends, that Thracian's cry of woe?

POLYMESTOR  (within) O horror! horror! my children! O the cruel blow.

LEADER Friends, new ills are brought to pass in yonder tent.

POLYMESTOR  (within) Nay, ye shall never escape for all your hurried
flight; for with my fist will I burst open the inmost recesses of
this hall. 

LEADER Hark! how he launches ponderous blows! Shall we force an entry?
The crisis calls on us to aid Hecuba and the Trojan women.  (HECUBA
enters, calling back into the tent.)  

HECUBA Strike on, spare not, burst the doors! thou shalt ne'er replace
bright vision in thy eyes nor ever see thy children, whom I have slain,
alive again. 

LEADER What! hast thou foiled the Thracian, and is the stranger in
thy power, mistress mine? is all thy threat now brought to pass?

HECUBA A moment, and thou shalt see him before the tent, his eyes
put out, with random step advancing as a blind man must; yea, and
the bodies of his two children whom I with my brave daughters of Troy
did slay; he hath paid me his forfeit; look where he cometh from the
tent. I will withdraw out of his path and stand aloof from the hot
fury of this Thracian, my deadly foe.  (POLYMESTOR rushes out. Blood
is streaming from his eyes.)  

POLYMESTOR  (chanting) Woe is me! whither can I go, where halt, or
whither turn? shall crawl upon my hands like a wild four-footed beast
on their track? Which path shall I take first, this or that, eager
as I am to clutch those Trojan murderesses that have destroyed me?
Out upon ye, cursed daughters of Phrygia! to what corner have ye fled
cowering before me? O sun-god, would thou couldst heal my bleeding
orbs, ridding me of my blindness! 

Ha! hush! I catch their stealthy footsteps here. Where can I dart
on them and gorge me on their flesh and bones, making for myself wild
beasts' meal, exacting vengeance in requital of their outrage on me?
Ah, woe is me! whither am I rushing, leaving my babes unguarded for
hell-hounds to mangle, to be murdered and ruthlessly cast forth upon
the hills, a feast of blood for dogs? Where shall I stay or turn my
steps? where rest? like a ship that lies anchored at sea, so gathering
close my linen robe I rush to that chamber of death, to guard my babes.

LEADER Woe is thee! what grievous outrage hath been wreaked on thee!
fearful penalty for thy foul deed hath the deity imposed, whoe'er
he is whose hand is heavy upon thee. 

POLYMESTOR  (chanting) Woe is me! Ho! my Thracian spearmen, clad
in mail, a race of knights whom Ares doth inspire! Ho! Achaeans! sons
of Atreus ho! to you I loudly call; come hither, in God's name come!
Doth any hearken, or will no man help me? Why do ye delay? Women,
captive women have destroyed me. A fearful fate is mine; ah me my
hideous outrage! Whither can I turn or go? Shall I take wings and
soar aloft to the mansions of the sky, where Orion and Sirius dart
from their eyes a flash as of fire, or shall I, in my misery, plunge
to Hades' murky flood? 

LEADER 'Tis a venial sin, when a man, suffering from evils too heavy
to bear, rids himself of a wretched existence.  (AGAMEMNON and his
retinue enter.)  

AGAMEMNON Hearing a cry I am come hither; for Echo, child of the
mountain-rock, hath sent her voice loud-ringing through the host,
causing a tumult. Had I not known that Troy's towers were levelled
by the might of Hellas, this uproar had caused no slight terror.

POLYMESTOR Best of friends! for by thy voice I know thee, Agamemnon,
dost see my piteous state? 

AGAMEMNON What! hapless Polymestor, who hath stricken thee? who hath
reft thine eves of sight, staining the pupils with blood? who hath
slain these children? whoe'er he was, fierce must have been his wrath
against thee and thy children. 

POLYMESTOR Hecuba, helped by the captive women, hath destroyed me;
no! not destroyed, far worse than that. 

AGAMEMNON  (addressing HECUBA) What hast thou to say? Was it thou
that didst this deed, as he avers? thou, Hecuba, that hast ventured
on this inconceivable daring? 

POLYMESTOR Ha! what is that? is she somewhere near? show me, tell
me where, that I may grip her in my hands and rend her limb from limb,
bespattering her with gore. 

AGAMEMNON Ho! madman, what wouldst thou? 

POLYMESTOR By heaven I entreat thee, let me vent on her the fury
of my arm. 

AGAMEMNON Hold! banish that savage spirit from thy heart and plead
thy cause, that after hearing thee and her in turn I may fairly decide
what reason there is for thy present sufferings. 

POLYMESTOR I will tell my tale. There was a son of Priam, Polydorus,
the youngest, a child by Hecuba, whom his father Priam sent to me
from Troy to bring up in my halls, suspecting no doubt the fall of
Troy. Him I slew; but hear my reason for so doing, to show how cleverly
and wisely I had planned. My fear was that if that child were left
to be thy enemy, he would re-people Troy and settle it afresh; and
the Achaeans, knowing that a son of Priam survived, might bring another
expedition against the Phrygian land and harry and lay waste these
plains of Thrace hereafter, for the neighbours of Troy to experience
the very troubles we were lately suffering, O king. Now Hecuba, having
discovered the death of her son, brought me hither on this pretext,
saying she would tell me of hidden treasure stored up in Ilium by
the race of Priam; and she led me apart with my children into the
tent, that none but I might hear her news. So I sat me down on a couch
in their midst to rest; for there were many of the Trojan maidens
seated there, some on my right hand, some on my left, as it had been
beside a friend; and they were praising the weaving of our Thracian
handiwork, looking at this robe as they held it up to the light; meantime
others examined my Thracian spear and so stripped me of the protection
of both. And those that were young mothers were dandling my children
in their arms, with loud admiration, as they passed them on from hand
to hand to remove them far from their father; and then after their
smooth speeches  (wouldst thou believe it?)  in an instant snatching
daggers from some secret place in their dress they stab my children;
whilst others, like foes, seized me hand and foot; and if I tried
to raise my head, anxious to help my babes, they would clutch me by
the hair; while if I stirred my hands, I could do nothing, poor wretch!
for the numbers of the women. At last they wrought a fearful deed,
worse than what had gone before; for they took their brooches and
stabbed the pupils of my hapless eyes, making them gush with blood,
and then fled through the chambers; up I sprang like a wild beast
in pursuit of the shameless murderesses, searching along each wall
with hunter's care, dealing buffets, spreading ruin. This then is
what I have suffered because of my zeal for thee, O Agamemnon, for
slaying an enemy of thine. But to spare thee a lengthy speech; if
any of the men of former times have spoken ill of women, if any doth
so now, or shall do so hereafter, all this in one short sentence will
say; for neither land or sea produces a race so pestilent, as whosoever
hath had to do with them knows full well. 

LEADER Curb thy bold tongue, and do not, because of thy own woes,
thus embrace the whole race of women in one reproach; for though some
of us, and those a numerous class, deserve to be disliked, there are
others amongst us who rank naturally amongst the good. 

HECUBA Never ought words to have outweighed deeds in this world,
Agamemnon. No! if a man's deeds had been good, so should his words
have been; if, on the other hand, evil, his words should have betrayed
their unsoundness, instead of its being possible at times to give
a fair complexion to injustice. There are, 'tis true, clever persons,
who have made a science of this, but their cleverness cannot last
for ever; a miserable end awaits them; none ever yet escaped. This
is a warning I give thee at the outset. Now will I turn to this fellow,
and will give thee thy answer, thou who sayest it was to save Achaea
double toil and for Agamemnon's sake that thou didst slay my son.
Nay, villain, in the first place how could the barbarian race ever
be friends with Hellas? Impossible, ever. Again, what interest hadst
thou to further by thy zeal? was it to form some marriage, or on the
score of kin, or, prithee, why? or was it likely that they would sail
hither again and destroy thy country's crops? Whom dost thou expect
to persuade into believing that? Wouldst thou but speak the truth,
it was the gold that slew my son, and thy greedy spirit. Now tell
me this; why, when Troy was victorious, when her ramparts still stood
round her, when Priam was alive, and Hector's warring prospered, why
didst thou not, if thou wert really minded to do Agamemnon a service,
then slay the child, for thou hadst him in thy palace 'neath thy care,
or bring him with thee alive to the Argives? Instead of this, when
our sun was set and the smoke of our city showed it was in the enemy's
power, thou didst murder the guest who had come to thy hearth. Furthermore,
to prove thy villainly, hear this; if thou wert really a friend to
those Achaeans, thou shouldst have brought the gold, which thou sayst
thou art keeping not for thyself but for Agamemnon, and given it to
them, for they were in need and had endured a long exile from their
native land. Whereas not even now canst thou bring thyself to part
with it, but persistest in keeping it in thy palace. Again, hadst
thou kept my son safe and sound, as thy duty was, a fair renown would
have been thy reward, for it is in trouble's hour that the good most
clearly show their friendship; though prosperity of itself in every
case finds friends. Wert thou in need of money and he prosperous,
that son of mine would have been as a mighty treasure for thee to
draw upon; but now thou hast him no longer to be thy friend, and the
benefit of the gold is gone from thee, thy children too are dead,
and thyself art in this sorry plight. 

To thee, Agamemnon, I say, if thou help this man, thou wilt show thy
worthlessness; for thou wilt be serving one devoid of honour or piety,
a stranger to the claims of good faith, a wicked host; while I shall
say thou delightest in evil-doers, being such an one thyself; but
I rail not at my masters. 

LEADER Look you! how a good cause ever affords men an opening for
a good speech. 

AGAMEMNON To be judge in a stranger's troubles goes much against
my grain, but still I must; yea, for to take this matter in hand and
then put it from me is a shameful course. My opinion, that thou mayst
know it, is that it was not for the sake of the Achaeans or me that
thou didst slay thy guest, but to keep that gold in thy own house.
In thy trouble thou makest a case in thy own interests. Maybe amongst
you 'tis a light thing to murder guests, but with us in Hellas 'tis
a disgrace. How can I escape reproach if I judge the not guilty? I
cannot do it. Nay, since thou didst dare thy horrid crime, endure
as well its painful consequence. 

POLYMESTOR Woe is me! worsted by a woman and a slave, I am, it seems,
to suffer by unworthy hands. 

HECUBA Is it not just for thy atrocious crime? 

POLYMESTOR Ah, my children! ah, my blinded eyes! woe is me!

HECUBA Dost thou grieve? what of me? thinkst thou I grieve not for
my son? 

POLYMESTOR Thou wicked wretch! thy delight is in mocking me.

HECUBA I am avenged on thee; have I not cause for joy? 

POLYMESTOR The joy will soon cease, in the day when ocean's flood-

HECUBA Shall convey me to the shores of Hellas? 

POLYMESTOR Nay, but close o'er thee when thou fallest from the masthead.

HECUBA Who will force me to take the leap? 

POLYMESTOR Of thy own accord wilt thou climb the ship's mast.

HECUBA With wings upon my back, or by what means? 

POLYMESTOR Thou wilt become a dog with bloodshot eyes. 

HECUBA How knowest thou of my transformation? 

POLYMESTOR Dionysus, our Thracian prophet, told me so. 

HECUBA And did he tell thee nothing of thy present trouble?

POLYMESTOR No; else hadst thou never caught me thus by guile.

HECUBA Shall I die or live, and so complete my life on earth?

POLYMESTOR Die shalt thou; and to thy tomb shall be given a name-

HECUBA Recalling my form, or what wilt thou tell me? 

POLYMESTOR "The hapless hound's grave," a mark for mariners."

HECUBA 'Tis naught to me, now that thou hast paid me forfeit.

POLYMESTOR Further, thy daughter Cassandra must die. 

HECUBA I scorn the prophecy! I give it to thee to keep for thyself.

POLYMESTOR Her shall the wife of Agamemnon, grim keeper of his palace,
slay. 

HECUBA Never may the daughter of Tyndareus do such a frantic deed!

POLYMESTOR And she shall slay this king as well, lifting high the
axe. 

AGAMEMNON Ha! sirrah, art thou mad? art so eager to find sorrow?

POLYMESTOR Kill me, for in Argos there awaits thee a murderous bath.

AGAMEMNON Ho! servants, hale him from my sight 

POLYMESTOR Ha! my words gall thee? 

AGAMEMNON Stop his mouth! 

POLYMESTOR Close it now; for I have spoken. 

AGAMEMNON Haste and cast him upon some desert island, since his mouth
is full of such exceeding presumption. Go thou, unhappy Hecuba, and
bury thy two corpses; and you, Trojan women, to your masters' tents
repair, for lo! I perceive a breeze just rising to waft us home. God
grant we reach our country and find all well at home, released from
troubles here!  (POLYMESTOR is dragged away by AGAMEMNON'S guards.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Away to the harbour and the tents, my friends,
to prove the toils of slavery! for such is fate's relentless hest.

 THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the palace of THEOCLYMENUS in Egypt. It is near the mouth of
the Nile. The tomb of Proteus, the father of THEOCLYMENUS is visible.
HELEN is discovered alone before the tomb.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

HELEN Lo! These are the fair virgin streams of Nile, the river that
waters Egypt's tilth, fed by pure melting snow instead of rain from
heaven. Proteus during his life-time was king of this land, dwelling
in the isle of Pharos, and ruling o'er Egypt; and he took to wife
one of the daughters of the sea, Psamathe, after she left the embraces
of Aeacus. Two children she bare in this his palace, a son Theoclymenus,
who hath passed his life in duteous service to the gods, and likewise
a noble daughter, her mother's pride, called Eido in her infancy,
but when she reached her youthful prime, the age for wedded joys,
renamed Theonoe; for well she knew whate'er the gods design, both
present and to come, for she had won this guerdon from her grandsire
Nereus. Nor is my fatherland unknown to fame, e'en Sparta, or my sire
Tyndareus; for a legend tells how Zeus winged his way to my mother
Leda's breast, in the semblance of a bird, even a swan, and thus as
he fled from an eagle's pursuit, achieved by guile his amorous purpose,
if this tale be true. My name is Helen, and I will now recount the
sorrows I have suffered. To a hollow vale on Ida came three goddesses
to Paris, for beauty's prize contending, Hera and Cypris, and the
virgin child of Zeus, eager to secure his verdict on their loveliness.
Now Cypris held out my beauty,-if aught so wretched deserves that
name,-as a bride before the eyes of Paris, saying he should marry
me; and so she won the day; wherefore the shepherd of Ida left his
steading, and came to Sparta, thinking to win me for his bride. But
Hera, indignant at not defeating the goddesses, brought to naught
my marriage with Paris, and gave to Priam's princely son not Helen,
but a phantom endowed with life, that she made in my image out of
the breath of heaven; and Paris thought that I was his, although I
never was,-an idle fancy! Moreover, the counsels of Zeus added further
troubles unto these; for upon the land of Hellas and the hapless Phrygians
he brought a war, that he might lighten mother-earth of her myriad
hosts of men, and to the bravest of the sons of Hellas bring renown.
So I was set up as a prize for all the chivalry of Hellas, to test
the might of Phrygia, yet not I, but my name alone; for Hermes caught
me up in the embracing air, and veiled me in a cloud; for Zeus was
not unmindful of me; and he set me down here in the house of Proteus,
judging him to be the most virtuous of all mankind; that so I might
preserve my marriage with Menelaus free from taint. Here then I abide,
while my hapless lord has gathered an army, and is setting out for
the towers of Ilium to track and recover me. And there by Scamander's
streams hath many a life breathed out its last, and all for me; and
I, that have endured all this, am accursed, and seem to have embroiled
all Hellas in a mighty war by proving a traitress to my husband. Why,
then, do I prolong my life? Because I heard Hermes declare, that I
should yet again make my home on Sparta's glorious soil, with my lord,-for
Hermes knew I never went to Ilium,-that so I might never submit to
any other's wooing. Now as long as Proteus gazed upon yon glorious
sun, I was safe from marriage; but when o'er him the dark grave closed,
the dead man's son was eager for my hand. But I, from regard to my
former husband, am throwing myself down in suppliant wise before this
tomb of Proteus, praying him to guard my husband's honour, that, though
through Hellas I bear a name dishonoured, at least my body here may
not incur disgrace.  (TEUCER enters.)  

TEUCER Who is lord and master of this fenced palace? The house is
one I may compare to the halls of Plutus, with its royal bulwarks
and towering buildings. Ha! great gods! what sight is here? I see
the counterfeit of that fell murderous dame, who ruined me and all
the Achaeans. May Heaven show its loathing for thee, so much dost
thou resemble Helen! Were I not standing on a foreign soil, with this
well-aimed shaft had worked thy death, thy reward for resembling the
daughter of Zeus. 

HELEN Oh! why, poor man, whoe'er thou art, dost thou turn from me,
loathing me for those troubles Helen caused? 

TEUCER I was wrong; I yielded to my anger more than I ought; my reason
was, the hate all Hellas bears to that daughter of Zeus. Pardon me,
lady, for the words I uttered. 

HELEN Who art thou? whence comest thou to visit this land?

TEUCER One of those hapless Achaeans am I, lady. 

HELEN No wonder then that thou dost bate Helen. But say, who art
thou? Whence comest? By what name am I to call thee? 

TEUCER My name is Teucer; my sire was Telamon, and Salamis is the
land that nurtured me. 

HELEN Then why art thou visiting these meadows by the Nile?

TEUCER A wanderer I, an exile from my native land. 

HELEN Thine must be a piteous lot; who from thy country drives thee
out? 

TEUCER My father Telamon. Couldst find a nearer and a dearer?

HELEN But why? This case is surely fraught with woe. 

TEUCER The death of Ajax my brother at Troy was my ruin.

HELEN How so? surely 'twas not thy sword that stole his life away?

TEUCER He threw himself on his own blade and died. 

HELEN Was he mad? for who with sense endowed would bring himself
to this? 

TEUCER Dost thou know aught of Achilles. son of Peleus?

HELEN He came, so I have heard, to woo Helen once. 

TEUCER When he died, he left his arms for his comrades to contest.

HELEN Well, if he did, what harm herein to Ajax? 

TEUCER When another won these arms, to himself he put an end.

HELEN Art thou then a sufferer by woes that he inflicted?

TEUCER Yes, because I did not join him in his death. 

HELEN So thou camest, sir stranger, to Ilium's famous town?

TEUCER Aye, and, after helping to sack it, myself did learn what
ruin meant. 

HELEN Is Troy already fired and utterly by flames consumed?

TEUCER Yea, so that not so much as one vestige of her walls is now
to be seen. 

HELEN Woe is thee, poor Helen! thou art the cause of Phrygia's ruin.

TEUCER And of Achaea's too. Ah! 'tis a tale of grievous misery!

HELEN How long is it since the city was sacked? 

TEUCER Nigh seven fruitful seasons have come and gone. 

HELEN And how much longer did ye abide in Troy? 

TEUCER Many a weary month, till through ten full years the moon had
held her course. 

HELEN And did ye capture that Spartan dame? 

TEUCER Menelaus caught her by the hair, and was for dragging her
away. 

HELEN Didst thou thyself behold that unhappy one? or art thou speaking
from hearsay? 

TEUCER As plain as I now see thee, I then saw her. 

HELEN Consider whether ye were but indulging an idle fancy sent by
heaven. 

TEUCER Bethink thee of some other topic; no more of her!

HELEN Are you so sure this fancy was reliable? 

TEUCER With these eyes I saw her face to face, if so be I see thee
now. 

HELEN Hath Menelaus reached his home by this time with his wife?

TEUCER No; he is neither in Argos, nor yet by the streams of Eurotas.

HELEN Ah me! here is evil news for those to whom thou art telling
it. 

TEUCER 'Tis said he disappeared with his wife. 

HELEN Did not all the Argives make the passage together?

TEUCER Yes: but a tempest scattered them in every direction.

HELEN In what quarter of the broad ocean? 

TEUCER They were crossing the Aegean in mid channel. 

HELEN And after that, doth no man know of Menelaus' arrival?

TEUCER No; none; but through Hellas is he reported to be dead.

HELEN Then am I lost. Is the daughter of Thestius alive?

TEUCER Dost speak of Leda? She is dead; aye, dead and gone.

HELEN Was it Helen's shame that caused her death? 

TEUCER Aye, 'tis said she tied the noose about her noble neck.

HELEN Are the sons of Tyndareus still alive or not? 

TEUCER Dead, and yet alive: 'tis a double story. 

HELEN Which is the more credible report? Woe is me for my sorrows!

TEUCER Men say that they are gods in the likeness of stars.

HELEN That is happy news; but what is the other rumour?

TEUCER That they by self-inflicted wounds gave up the ghost because
of their sister's shame. But enough of such talk! I have no wish to
multiply my griefs. The reason of my coming to this royal palace was
a wish to see that famous prophetess Theonoe. Do thou the means afford,
that I from her may obtain an oracle how I shall steer a favourable
course to the sea-girt shores of Cyprus; for there Apollo hath declared
my home shall be, giving to it the name of Salamis, my island home,
in honour of that fatherland across the main. 

HELEN That shall the voyage itself explain, sir stranger; but do
thou leave these shores and fly, ere the son of Proteus, the ruler
of this land, catch sight of thee. Now is he away with his trusty
hounds tracking his savage quarry to the death; for every stranger
that he catcheth from the land of Hellas doth he slay. His reason
never ask to know; my lips are sealed; for what could word of mine
avail thee? 

TEUCER Lady, thy words are fair. Heaven grant thee a fair requital
for this kindness! For though in form thou dost resemble Helen, thy
soul is not like hers, nay, very different. Perdition seize her! May
she never reach the streams of Eurotas! But thine be joy for evermore,
lady!  (TEUCER departs. The CHORUS OF CAPTIVE GREEK WOMEN enter. They
sing responsively with HELEN.)  

HELEN Ah me! what piteous dirge shall I strive to utter, now that
I am beginning my strain of bitter lamentation? What Muse shall I
approach with tears or songs of death or woe? Ah me! ye Sirens, Earth's
virgin daughters, winged maids, come, oh! come to aid my mourning,
bringing with you the Libyan flute or pipe, to waft to Persephone's
ear a tearful plaint, the echo of my sorrow, with grief for grief,
and mournful chant for chant, with songs of death and doom to match
my lamentation, that in return she may receive from me, besides my
tears, dirges for the departed dead beneath her gloomy roof!

CHORUS Beside the deep-blue water I chanced to be hanging purple
robes along the tendrils green and on the sprouting reeds, to dry
them in the sun-god's golden blaze, when lo! I heard a sound of woe,
a mournful wail, the voice of one crying aloud in her anguish; yea,
such a cry of woe as Naiad nymph might send ringing o'er the hills,
while to her cry the depths of rocky grots re-echo her screams at
the violence of Pan. 

HELEN Woe! woe! ye maids of Hellas, booty of barbarian sailors! one
hath come, an Achaean mariner, bringing fresh tears to me, the news
of Ilium's overthrow, how that it is left to the mercy of the foeman's
flame, and all for me the murderess, or for my name with sorrow fraught.
While for anguish at my deed of shame, hath Leda sought her death
by hanging; and on the deep, to weary wandering doomed my lord hath
met his end; and Castor and his brother, twin glory of their native
land, are vanished from men's sight, leaving the plains that shook
to their galloping steeds, and the course beside reed-fringed Eurotas,
where those youthful athletes strove. 

CHORUS Ah, misery! Alas! for thy grievous destiny! Woe for thy sad
lot, lady! Ah! 'twas a day of sorrow meted out for thee when Zeus
came glancing through the sky on snowy pinions like a swan and won
thy mother's heart. What evil is not thine? Is there a grief in life
that thou hast not endured? Thy mother is dead; the two dear sons
of Zeus have perished miserably, and thou art severed from thy country's
sight, while through the towns of men a rumour runs, consigning thee,
my honoured mistress, to a barbarian's bed; and 'mid the ocean waves
thy lord hath lost his life, and never, never more shalt thou fill
with joy thy father's halls or Athena's temple of the "Brazen House."

HELEN Ah! who was that Phrygian, who was he, that felled that pine
with sorrow fraught for Ilium, and for those that came from Hellas?
Hence it was that Priam's son his cursed barque did build, and sped
by barbarian oars sailed unto my home, in quest of beauty, woman's
curse, to win me for his bride; and with him sailed the treacherous
queen of Love, on slaughter bent, with death alike for Priam's sons,
and Danai too. Ah me! for my hard lot! Next, Hera, stately bride of
Zeus, seated on her golden throne, sent the son of Maia, swift of
foot, who caught me up as I was gathering fresh rose-buds in the folds
of my robe, that I might go to the "Brazen House," and bore me through
the air to this loveless land, making me an object of unhappy strife
'twixt Hellas and the race of Priam. And my name is but a sound without
reality beside the streams of Simois. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Well I know thou hast a bitter lot to bear;
still 'tis best to bear as lightly as we may the ills that life is
heir to. 

HELEN Good friends, to what a fate am I united? Did not my mother
bear me to be a monster to the world? For no woman, Hellene or barbarian,
gives birth to babes in eggs inclosed, as they say Leda bare me to
Zeus. My life and all I do is one miracle, partly owing to Hera, and
partly is my beauty to blame. Would God I could rub my beauty out
like a picture, and assume hereafter in its stead a form less comely,
and oh! that Hellas had forgotten the evil fate that now I bear, and
were now remembering my career of honour as surely as they do my deeds
of shame. Now, if a man doth turn his eyes to a single phase of fortune,
and meets ill-usage at heaven's hands, 'tis hard no doubt; but still
it can be borne; but I in countless troubles am involved. First, although
I never sinned, my good name is gone. And this is a grief beyond the
reality, if a man incurs blame for sins that are not his. Next, have
the gods removed me from my native land, to dwell with men of barbarous
ways, and reft of every friend, I arn become a slave though free by
birth; for amongst barbarians all are slaves but one. And the last
anchor that held my fortunes, the hope that my husband would return
one day, and rid me of my woes, is now no more, lost since the day
he died. My mother too is dead, and I am called her murderess, unjustly
it is true, but still that injustice is mine to bear; and she that
was the glory of my house, my darling child, is growing old and grey,
unwedded still; and those twin brethren, called the sons of Zeus,
are now no more. But 'tis fortune, not my own doing, that hath crushed
me with sorrow and slain me. And this is the last evil of all; if
ever I come to my native land. they will shut me up in prison, thinking
me that Helen of Ilium, in quest of whom Menelaus came thither. Were
my husband still alive, we might have recognized each other, by having
recourse to tokens which ourselves alone would know. But now this
may not be, nor is there any chance of his escape. Why then do I prolong
my life? What fortune have I still in store? Shall I choose marriage
as an alternative of evils, and dwell with a barbarian lord, seated
at his sumptuous board? No! when a husband she loathes is mated with
a woman, even life is loathly to her. Best for her to die; but how
shall I die a noble death? The dangling noose is an uncomely end;
even slaves consider it disgrace; to stab oneself hath something fair
and. noble in it; 'tis a small thing that moment of ridding the flesh
of life. Yes, it must be; I am plunged so deep in misery; for that
beauty, which to other women is a boon, to me hath been a very bane.

LEADER Helen, never believe that the stranger, whoe'er he was that
came, has spoken naught but truth. 

HELEN Yet he said so clearly that my lord was dead. 

LEADER There is much that falsehood seems to make quite clear.

HELEN The word of truth hath a very different sound to falsehood.

LEADER Thou art inclined to misfortune, rather than to luck.

HELEN Fear girds me with terrors as with a garment, and takes me
in her train. 

LEADER What friends hast thou within the palace? 

HELEN All are my friends here save him who seeks to wed-me.

LEADER Thy action then is clear; leave thy seat at the tomb.

HELEN To what words or advice art thou leading up? 

LEADER Go in and question the daughter of the ocean Nereid, who knoweth
all things, even Theonoe, whether thy husband is still alive, or whether
he hath left the light of day; and when thou knowest for certain,
be glad or sorrowful, as fits thy fortune. But before thou hast right
knowledge, what shall sorrow avail thee? Nay, hearken to me; leave
this tomb and seek the maiden's company, that she may tell thee the
truth, for from her shalt thou learn all. If thou abide here in this
seat, what prospect hast thou? And I will myself go in with thee,
and with thee inquire of the maiden's oracles; for 'tis a woman's
bounden duty to share a sister's trouble.  (The following lines are
chanted responsively by HELEN and the CHORUS.)  

HELEN Kind friends, I welcome your advice. Come in, come in, that
ye may learn the result of my struggle within the palace.

CHORUS Thy invitation comes to very willing ears. 

HELEN Woe for this heavy day! Ah me! what mournful tidings shall
hear? 

CHORUS Dear mistress mine, be not a prophetess of sorrow, forestalling
lamentation. 

HELEN What is the fate of my poor husband? Doth he still behold the
light turning towards the sun-god's chariot and the stars in their
courses? Or among the dead, beneath the earth, is he to death consigned?

CHORUS Of the future take a brighter view, whatever shall betide.

HELEN On thee I call, and thee adjure, Eurotas green with river-reeds,
to tell me if this rumour of my husband's death be true.

CHORUS What boots this meaningless appeal? 

HELEN About my neck will I fasten the deadly noose from above, or
drive the murderous knife with self-aimed thrust deep into my throat
to sever it, striving to cut my flesh, a sacrifice to those goddesses
three and to that son of Priam, who in days gone by would wake the
music of his pipe around his steading. 

CHORUS Oh may sorrow be averted otherwhither, and thou be blest!

HELEN Woe is thee, unhappy Troy! Thou through deeds not done by the
art ruined, and hast suffered direst woe; for the gift that Cypris
gave to me, hath caused a sea of blood to flow, and many an eye to
weep, with grief on grief and tear on tear. All this hath Ilium suffered
and mothers have lost their children; and virgin sisters of the slain
have cut off their tresses by the swollen tide of Phrygian Scamander.
And the land of Hellas hath lifted her voice of woe and broken forth
in wailing, smiting on her head, and making tender cheeks to stream
with gore beneath the rending nail. Ah blest maid Callisto, who long
ago in Arcady didst find favour with Zeus, in the semblance of beast
four-footed, how much happier was thy lot than my mother's, for thou
hast changed the burden of thy grief and now with savage eye art weeping
o'er thy shaggy monster-shape; aye, and hers was a happier lot, whom
on a day Artemis drove from her choir, changed to a hind with horns
of gold, the fair Titanian maid, daughter of Merops, because of her
beauty; but my fair form hath proved the curse of Dardan Troy and
doomed Achaea's sons.  (HELEN and the CHORUS go into the palace. After
the doors have closed upon them, MENELAUS enters. He is alone and
clad in rags.)  

MENELAUS Ah! Pelops, easy victor long ago o'er thy rival Oenomaus
in the chariot-race on Pisa's plain, would thou hadst ended thy career
amongst the gods that day thou wert beguiled into making a banquet
for them, or ever thou hadst begotten my father Atreus, to whom were
born by Aerope his wife, Agamemnon and myself Menelaus, an illustrious
pair; and herein I make no idle boast, for 'twas a mighty host, I
trow, that I their leader carried o'er the sea to Troy, using no violence
to make them follow me, but leading all the chivalry of Hellas by
voluntary consent. And some of these must we number 'mid the slain,
and some to their joy have 'scaped the sea, bearing to their homes
again names long reckoned dead. But I, poor wretch, go wandering o'er
grey Ocean's swell a weary space, long as that which saw me sick the
towers of Ilium; and for all my longing to reach my country I am not
counted worthy of this boon by heaven, but to Libya's desert cheerless
roadsteads have I sailed, to each and all of them; and whensoe'er
I draw me near my native land, the storm-wind drives me back again,
and never yet have favouring breezes filled my sails, to let me reach
my fatherland. And now a wretched, shipwrecked mariner, my friends
all lost, am I cast up upon this shore; and my ship is shattered in
a thousand pieces against the rocks; and its keel was wrested from
its cunning fastenings; thereon did I with difficulty escape, most
unexpectedly, and Helen also, for her had I rescued from Troy and
had with me. But the name of this country and its people I know not;
for I blushed to mingle with the crowd to question them, anxious for
very shame to hide my misfortunes which reduce me to these sorry rags.
For when a man of high degree meets with adversity, he feels the strangeness
of his fallen state more keenly than a sufferer of long standing.
Dire want is wasting me; for I have neither food, nor raiment to gird
myself withal; behold the facts before you to judge from-I am clad
in tatters cast up from the ship; while all the robes I once did wear,
glorious attire and ornaments, bath the sea swallowed; and in a cavern's
deep recesses have I hidden my wife, the cause of all my trouble,
and have come hither, after straitly charging the survivors of my
friends to watch her. Alone am I come, seeking for those there left
some help, if haply I may find it after careful search. So when I
saw this palace girt with towering walls and stately gates of some
prosperous lord, I drew nigh; for I have hope to obtain somewhat for
my sailors from this wealthy house, whereas from houses which have
no store, the inmates for all their goodwill could furnish naught.
Ho! there, who keeps the gate and will come forth to bear my tale
of woe into the house?  (A PORTRESS comes out of the palace in answer
to his call.)  

PORTRESS Who stands before the door? Begone from the housel stand
not at the court-yard gate, annoying my masters! otherwise shalt thou
die, for thou art a Hellene born. and with them have we no dealings.

MENELAUS Mother, herein sayest thou rightly on all points. 'Tis well;
I will obey; but moderate thy words. 

PORTRESS Away! stranger, my orders are to admit no Hellene to this
palace. 

MENELAUS Ha! do not seek to push me hence, or thrust me away by violence.

PORTRESS Thou dost not heed my words, and therefore hast thyself
to blame. 

MENELAUS Carry my message to thy master in the palace. 

PORTRESS Some one would rue it, methinks, were I to take thy message.

MENELAUS I come as a shipwrecked man and a stranger, whom heaven
protects. 

PORTRESS Well, get thee to some other house than this. 

MENELAUS Nay, but I will pass into the house; so listen to me.

PORTRESS Let me tell thee thou art unwelcome, and soon wilt be forcibly
ejected. 

MENELAUS Ah me! where are now those famous troops of mine?

PORTRESS Elsewhere maybe thou wert a mighty man; thou art not here.

MENELAUS O fortune! I have not deserved such insult. 

PORTRESS Why are thy eyes with tear-drops wet? Why so sad?

MENELAUS 'Tis the contrast with my fortunes erst so blest.

PORTRESS Hence! then, and give thy friends those tears.

MENELAUS What land is this? whose is the palace? 

PORTRESS Proteus lives here. It is the land of Egypt. 

MENELAUS Egypt? Woe is me! to think that hither I have sailed!

PORTRESS Pray, what fault hast thou to find with the race of Nile?

MENELAUS 'Twas no fault I found; my own disasters I lament.

PORTRESS There be plenty in evil case; thou art not the only one.

MENELAUS Is the king, of whom thou speakest, here within?

PORTRESS There is his tomb; his son rules in his stead.

MENELAUS And where may he be? abroad, or in the house? 

PORTRESS He is not within. To Hellas is he a bitter foe.

MENELAUS His reason, pray, for this enmity? the results whereof I
have experienced. 

PORTRESS Beneath this roof dwells the daughter of Zeus, Helen.

MENELAUS What mean'st thou? what is it thou hast said? Repeat, I
pray, thy words. 

PORTRESS The daughter of Tyndareus is here, who erst in Sparta dwelt.

MENELAUS Whence came she? What means this business? 

PORTRESS She came from Lacedaemon hither. 

MENELAUS When? Surely I have never been robbed of my wife from the
cave! 

PORTRESS Before the Achaeans went to Troy, sir stranger. But get
thee hence; for somewhat hath chanced within, whereat the whole palace
is in an uproar. Thou comest most unseasonably; and if my master catch
thee, death will be thy stranger's gift. This say I, because to Hellas
I am well disposed, albeit I gave thee harsh answers for fear of my
master.  (The PORTRESS goes back into the palace.)  

MENELAUS What can I think or say? For after my previous troubles,
this is a fresh piece of ill-luck I hear, if, indeed, after recovering
my wife from Troy and bringing her hither, and putting her for safety
in the cave, I am then to find another woman living here with the
same name as my wife. She called her the begotten child of Zeus. Can
there be a man that hath the name of Zeus by the banks of Nile? The
Zeus of heaven is only one, at any rate. Where is there a Sparta in
the world save where Eurotas glides between his reedy banks? The name
of Tyndareus is the name of one alone. Is there any land of the same
name as Lacedaemon or Troy? I know not what to say; for naturally
there are many in the wide world that have the same names, cities
and women too; there is nothing, then, to marvel at. Nor yet again
will I fly from the alarm a servant raises; for there is none so cruel
of heart as to refuse me food when once he hears my name. All have
heard of Ilium's burning, and I, that set it ablaze, am famous now
throughout the world, I, Menelaus. I therefore wait the master of
this house. There are two issues I must watch; if he prove somewhat
stern of heart, I will to my wreck and there conceal myself; but if
he show any sign of pity, I will ask for help in this my present strait.
This is the crowning woe in all my misery, to beg the means of life
from other princes, prince though I be myself; still needs must I.
Yea, this is no saying of mine, but a word of wisdom, "Naught in might
exceedeth dread necessity."  (HELEN and the CHORUS enter from the
palace. They do not notice MENELAUS.)  

CHORUS  (singing) I have heard the voice of the maiden inspired.
Clear is the answer she hath vouchsafed within yon palace, declaring
that Menelaus is not yet dead and buried, passed to the land of shades,
where darkness takes the place of light; but on the stormy main is
wearing out his life, nor yet hath reached the haven of his country,
a wanderer dragging out a piteous existence, reft of every friend,
setting foot in every corner of the world, as he voyageth home from
Troy. 

HELEN Lo! once again I seek the shelter of this tomb, with Theonoe's
sweet tidings in my ears; she that knoweth all things of a truth;
for she saith my lord is yet alive and in the light of day, albeit
he is roaming to and fro after many a weary voyage, and hither shall
he come whenso he reach the limit of his toils, no novice in the wanderer's
life. But one thing did she leave unsaid. Is he to escape when he
hath come? And I refrained from asking that question clearly, so glad
was I when she told me he was safe. For she said that he was somewhere
nigh this shore, cast up by shipwreck with a handful of friends. Ah!
when shall I see thee come? How welcome will thy advent be!  (She
catches sight of MENELAUS.)  Ha! who is this? Am I being snared by
some trick of Proteus' impious son? Oh! let me, like a courser at
its speed, or a votary of Bacchus, approach the tomb! for there is
something wild about this fellow's looks, who is eager to o'ertake
me. 

MENELAUS Ho there! thou that with fearful effort seekest to reach
the basement of the tomb and the pillars of burnt sacrifice, stay
thee. Wherefore art flying? Ah! with what speechless amaze the sight
of thee affects me! 

HELEN O friends! I am being ill-treated. This man is keeping me from
the tomb, and is eager to take and give me to his master, whose wooing
I was seeking to avoid. 

MENELAUS No robber I, or minister of evil. 

HELEN At any rate the garb wherein thou art clad is unseemly.

MENELAUS Stay thy hasty flight; put fear aside. 

HELEN I do so, now that I have reached this spot. 

MENELAUS Who art thou? whom do I behold in thee, lady? 

HELEN Nay, who art thou? The self-same reason prompts us both.

MENELAUS never saw a closer resemblance. 

HELEN Great God! Yea, for to recognize our friends is of God.

MENELAUS Art thou from Hellas, or a native of this land?

HELEN From Hellas; but I would learn thy story too. 

MENELAUS Lady, in thee I see a wondrous likeness to Helen.

HELEN And I in thee to Menelaus; I know not what to say.

MENELAUS Well, thou hast recognized aright a man of many sorrows.

HELEN Hail! to thy wife's arms restored at last! 

MENELAUS Wife indeed! Lay not a finger on my robe. 

HELEN The wife that Tyndareus, my father, gave thee. 

MENELAUS O Hecate, giver of light, send thy visions favourably!

HELEN In me thou beholdest no spectre of the night, attendant on
the queen of phantoms. 

MENELAUS Nor yet am I in my single person the husband of two wives.

HELEN What other woman calls thee lord? 

MENELAUS The inmate of yonder cave, whom I from Troy convey.

HELEN Thou hast none other wife but me. 

MENELAUS Can it be my mind is wandering, my sight failing?

HELEN Dost not believe thou seest in me thy wife? 

MENELAUS Thy form resembles her, but the real truth robs me of this
belief. 

HELEN Observe me well; what need hast thou of clearer proof?

MENELAUS Thou art like her; that will I never deny. 

HELEN Who then shall teach thee, unless it be thine own eyes?

MENELAUS Herein is my dilemma; I have another wife. 

HELEN To Troy I never went; that was a phantom. 

MENELAUS Pray, who fashions living bodies? 

HELEN The air, whence thou hast a wife of heaven's workmanship.

MENELAUS What god's handiwork? Strange is the tale thou tellest.

HELEN Hera made it as a substitute, to keep me from Paris.

MENELAUS How then couldst thou have been here, and in Troy, at the
same time? 

HELEN The name may be in many a place at once, though not the body.

MENELAUS Unhand me! the sorrows I brought with me suffice.

HELEN What! wilt leave me, and take that phantom bride away?

MENELAUS For thy likeness unto Helen, fare thee well. 

HELEN Ruined! in thee I found my lord only to lose thee.

MENELAUS The greatness of my troubles at Troy convinces me; thou
dost not. 

HELEN Ah, woe is me! who was ever more unfortunate than I? Those
whom I love best are leaving me, nor shall I ever reach Hellas, my
own dear native land.  (The FIRST MESSENGER enters in haste.)

MESSENGER At last I find thee, Menelaus, after an anxious search,
not till I have evandered through the length and breadth of this foreign
strand; I am sent by thy comrades, whom thou didst leave behind.

MENELAUS What news? surely you are not being spoiled by the barbarians?

MESSENGER A miracle hath happened; my words are too weak for the
reality. 

MENELAUS Speak; for judging by this haste, thou hast stirring news.

MESSENGER My message is: thy countless toils have all been toiled
in vain. 

MENELAUS That is an old tale of woe to mourn! come, thy news?

MESSENGER Thy wife hath disappeared, soaring away into the embracing
air; in heaven she now is hidden, and as she left the hollowed cave
where we were guarding her, she hailed us thus, "Ye hapless Phrygians,
and all Achaea's race! for me upon Scamander's strand by Hera's arts
ye died from day to day, in the false belief that Helen was in the
hands of Paris. But I, since I have stayed my appointed time, and
kept the laws of fate, will now depart unto the sky that gave me birth;
but the unhappy daughter of Tyndareus, through no fault of hers, hath
borne an evil name without reason."  (Catching Sight of HELEN)  Daughter
of Leda, hail to thee, so thou art here after all! I was just announcing
thy departure to the hidden starry realms, little knowing that thou
couldst fly at will. I will not a second time let thee flout us thus,
for thou didst cause tiki lord and his comrades trouble all for naught
in Ilium. 

MENELAUS This is even what she said; her words are proved true; O
longed-for day, how hath it restored thee to my arms! 

HELEN O Menelaus, dearest husband, the time of sorrow has been long,
but joy is now ours at last. Ah, friends, what joy for me to hold
my husband in a fond embrace after many a weary cycle of yon blazing
lamp of day! 

MENELAUS What joy for me to hold my wife! but with all that I would
ask about these years, I now know not where I may first begin.

HELEN O rapture! the very hair upon my head starts up for joy! my
tears run down! Around thy neck I fling my arms, dear husband, to
hug my joy to me. 

MENELAUS O happy, happy sight! I have no fault to find; my wife,
he daughter of Zeus and Leda, is mine again, she whom her brothers
on their snow-white steeds, whilst torches blazed, made my happy bride,
but gods removed her from my home. Now is the deity guiding us to
a new destiny, happier than of yore. 

HELEN Evil into good transformed hath brought us twain together at
last, dear husband; but late though it be, God grant me joy of my
good luck! 

MENELAUS God grant thee joy! I join thee in the self-same prayer;
for of us twain one cannot suffer without the other. 

HELEN No more, my friends, I mourn the past; no longer now I grieve.
My own dear husband is restored to me, whose coming from Troy I have
waited many a long year. 

MENELAUS I to thee, and thou to me. And after these long, long years
I have at last discovered the fraud of the goddess. But these tears,
in gladness shed, are tears of thankfulness rather than of sorrow.

HELEN What can I say? What mortal heart could e'er have had such
hope? To my bosom I press thee, little as I ever thought to.

MENELAUS And I to mine press thee, who all men thought hadst gone
to Ida's town and the hapless towers of Ilium. 

HELEN Ah me! ah me! that is a bitter subject to begin on.

MENELAUS Tell me, I adjure thee, how wert thou from my home conveyed?

HELEN Alas! alas! 'tis a bitter tale thou askest to hear.

MENELAUS Speak, for I must hear it; all that comes is Heaven's gift.

HELEN I loathe the story I am now to tell. 

MENELAUS Tell it for all that. 'Tis sweet to hear of trouble past.

HELEN I ne'er set forth to be the young barbarian's bride, with oars
and wings of lawless love to speed me on my way. 

MENELAUS What deity or fate tore thee from thy country, then?

HELEN Ah, my lord! 'twas Hermes, the son of Zeus, that brought and
placed me by the banks of Nile. 

MENELAUS A miracle! Who sent thee thither? O monstrous story!

HELEN I wept, and still my eyes are wet with tears. 'Twas the wife
of Zeus that ruined me. 

MENELAUS Hera? wherefore should she afflict us twain? 

HELEN Woe is me for my awful fate! Woe for those founts and baths
where the goddesses made brighter still that beauty, which evoked
the fatal verdict! 

MENELAUS Why did Hera visit thee with evil regarding this verdict?

HELEN To wrest the promise of Cypris- 

MENELAUS How now? Say on. 

HELEN From Paris, to whom that goddess pledged me. 

MENELAUS Woe for thee! 

HELEN And so she brought me hither to Egypt to my sorrow.

MENELAUS Then she gave him a phantom in thy stead, as thou tellest
me? 

HELEN And then began those woes of thine, ah, mother! woe is me!

MENELAUS What meanest thou? 

HELEN My mother is no more; my shameful marriage made her fix the
noose about her neck. 

MENELAUS Ah me! is our daughter Hermione yet alive? 

HELEN Still unwed, childless still, she mourns my fatal marriage.

MENELAUS O Paris, who didst utterly o'erthrow my home, here was thy
ruin too and theirs, those countless mail-clad Danai. 

HELEN From my country, city, and from thee heaven cast me forth unhappy
and accursed, because I left,-and yet not I,-home and husband for
union of foul shame. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS If haply ye find happiness in the future, it
will suffice when to the past ye look. 

MESSENGER Menelaus, grant me too a portion of that joy which, though
mine own eyes see, I scarcely comprehend. 

MENELAUS Come then, old friend, and share with us our talk.

MESSENGER Was it not then in her power to decide all the trouble
in Troy? 

MENELAUS It was not; I was tricked by the gods into taking to my
arms a misty phantom-form, to my sorrow. 

MESSENGER How so? was it then for this we vainly toiled?

MENELAUS 'Twas Hera's handiwork, and the jealousy of three goddesses.

MESSENGER Is this real woman, then, thy wife? 

MENELAUS This is she; trust my word for that. 

MESSENGER Daughter, how changeful and inscrutable is the nature of
God! With some good end doth he vary men's fortune-now up, now down;
one suffers; another who ne'er knew suffering, is in his turn to awful
ruin brought, having no assurance in his lot from day to day. Thou
and thy husband have had your share of trouble-thou in what the world
has said, he in battle's heat. For all the striving that he strove,
he got him naught; while now, without an effort made, every blessing
fortune boasts is his. And thou, in spite of all, hast brought no
shame upon thy aged sire, or those twin sons of Zeus, nor art thou
guilty of those rumoured crimes. Now again do I recall thy wedding
rites, remembering the blazing torch I bore beside thee in a four-horsed
chariot at full gallop; while thou with this thy lord, a new-made
bride, wert driving forth from thy happy home. A sorry servant he,
whoso regardeth not his master's interest, sympathizing with his sorrows
and his joys. Slave though I was born, yet may I be numbered amongst
honest servants; for in heart, though not in name, I am free. For
this is better far than in my single person to suffer these two evils,
to feel my heart corrupt, and as the slave of others to be at my neighbour's
beck and call. 

MENELAUS Come, old friend, oft hast thou stood side by side with
me and taken thy full share of toil; so now be partner in my happiness.
Go, tell my comrades, whom I left behind, the state of matters here,
as thou hast found them, and the issue of my fortunes; and bid them
wait upon the beach and abide the result of the struggle, which I
trow awaits me; and if mayhap we find a way to take this lady from
the land by stealth, tell them to keep good watch that we may share
the luck and escape, if possible, from the barbarian's clutch.

MESSENGER It shall be done, O king. Now I see how worthless are the
seers' tricks, how full of falsehood; nor is there after all aught
trustworthy in the blaze of sacrifice or in the cry of feathered fowls;
'tis folly, the very notion that birds can help mankind. Calchas never
by word or sign showed the host the truth, when he saw his friends
dying on behalf of a phantom, nor yet did Helenus; but the city was
stormed in vain. Perhaps thou wilt say, 'twas not heaven's will that
they should do so. Then why do we employ these prophets? Better were
it to sacrifice to the gods, and crave a blessing, leaving prophecy
alone; for this was but devised as a bait to catch livelihood, and
no man grows rich by divination if he is idle. No! sound judgment
and discernment are the best of seers.  (The MESSENGER departs.)

LEADER My views about seers agree exactly with this old man's: whoso
hath the gods upon his side will have the best seer in his house.

HELEN Good! so far all is well. But how camest thou, poor husband,
safe from Troy? though 'tis no gain to know, yet friends feel a longing
to learn all that their friends have suffered. 

MENELAUS That one short sentence of thine contains a host of questions.
Why should I tell thee of our losses in the Aegean, or of the beacon
Nauplius lighted on Euboea? or of my visits to Crete and the cities
of Libya, or of the peaks of Perseus? For I should never satisfy thee
with the tale, and by telling thee should add to my own pain, though
I suffered enough at the time; and so would my grief be doubled.

HELEN Thy answer shows more wisdom than my question. Omit the rest,
and tell me only this; how long wert thou a weary wanderer o'er the
wide sea's face? 

MENELAUS Seven long years did I see come and go, besides those ten
in Troy. 

HELEN Alas, poor sufferer! 'twas a weary while. And thou hast thence
escaped only to bleed here. 

MENELAUS How so? what wilt thou tell? Ah wife, thou hast ruined me.

HELEN Escape and fly with all thy speed from this land. Thou wilt
be slain by him whose house this is. 

MENELAUS What have I done to merit such a fate? 

HELEN Thou hast arrived unexpectedly to thwart my marriage.

MENELAUS What! is some man bent on wedding my wife? 

HELEN Aye, and on heaping those insults on me, which I have hitherto
endured. 

MENELAUS Is he some private prince, or a ruler of this land?

HELEN The son of Proteus, king of the country. 

MENELAUS This was that dark saying I heard the servant tell.

HELEN At which of the barbarian's gates wert thou standing?

MENELAUS Here, whence like a beggar I was like to be driven.

HELEN Surely thou wert not begging food? Ah, woe is me!

MENELAUS That was what I was doing, though I had not the name of
beggar. 

HELEN Of course thou knowest, then, all about my marriage.

MENELAUS I do. But whether thou hast escaped thy lover, I know not.

HELEN Be well assured I have kept my body chaste. 

MENELAUS How wilt thou convince me of this? If true, thy words are
sweet. 

HELEN Dost see the wretched station I have kept at this tomb?

MENELAUS I see, alas! a bed of straw; but what hast thou to do with
it? 

HELEN There I crave escape from this marriage as a suppliant.

MENELAUS For want of an altar, or because it is the barbarians' way?

HELEN This was as good a protection to me as the gods' temples.

MENELAUS May I not then even bear thee homeward on my ship?

HELEN The sword far sooner than thy wife's embrace is waiting thee.

MENELAUS So should I be of all men the most miserable. 

HELEN Put shame aside, and fly from this land. 

MENELAUS Leaving thee behind? 'twas for thy sake I sacked Troy.

HELEN Better so, than that our union should cause thy death.

MENELAUS Oh! these are coward words, unworthy of those days at Troy!

HELEN Thou canst not slay the prince, thy possible intent.

MENELAUS Hath he, then, a body which steel cannot wound?

HELEN Thou shalt hear. But to attempt impossibilities is no mark
of wisdom. 

MENELAUS Am I to let them bind my hands, and say nothing?

HELEN Thou art in a dilemma; some scheme must be devised.

MENELAUS I had liefer die in action than sitting still.

HELEN There is one hope, and only one, of our safety. 

MENELAUS Will gold, or daring deeds, or winning words procure it?

HELEN We are safe if the prince learn not of thy coming.

MENELAUS ary one tell him it is I? He certainly will not know who
I am. 

HELEN He hath within his palace an ally equal to the gods.

MENELAUS Some voice divine within the secret chambers of his house?

HELEN No; his sister; Theonoe men call her. 

MENELAUS Her name hath a prophetic sound; tell me what she doth.

HELEN She knoweth everything, and she will tell her brother thou
art come. 

MENELAUS Then must we die; for I cannot escape her ken.

HELEN Perchance we might by suppliant prayers win her over.

MENELAUS To what end? To what vain hope art thou leading me?

HELEN That she should not tell her brother thou art here.

MENELAUS Suppose we persuade her, can we get away? 

HELEN Easily, if she connive thereat; without her knowledge, no,

MENELAUS Be that thy task; women deal best with women. 

HELEN I will not fail, be sure, to clasp her knees. 

MENELAUS Come, then; only, suppose she reject our proposals?

HELEN Thou wilt be slain, and I, alas! wedded by force.

MENELAUS Thou wilt betray me; that "force" of thine is but an excuse.

HELEN Nay, by thy life I swear a sacred oath. 

MENELAUS What meanest thou? dost swear to die and never to another
husband yield? 

HELEN Yes, by the self-same sword; I will fall by thy side.

MENELAUS On these conditions touch my right hand. 

HELEN I do so, swearing I will quit the light of day if thou art
slain. 

MENELAUS I, too, will end my life if I lose thee. 

HELEN How shall we die so as to gain fame? 

MENELAUS I will slay thee and then myself upon the summit of the
tomb. But first will I in doughty fight contest another's claim to
thee; and let who will draw nigh! for I will not sully the lustre
of my Trojan fame, nor will I, on my return to Hellas, incur a storm
of taunts, as one who robbed Thetis of Achilles; saw Ajax, son of
Telamon, fall a weltering corpse; and the sort of Neleus of his child
bereft; shall I then flinch myself from death for my own wife? No,
no! For if the gods are wise, o'er a brave man by his foes laid low
they lightly sprinkle the earth that is his tomb, while cowards 'they
cast forth on barren rocky soil. 

LEADER Grant, heaven, that the race of Tantalus may at last be blest,
and pass from sorrow unto joy! 

HELEN Ah, woe is me! Yea, all my lot is woe; O Menelaus, we are utterly
undone! Behold! from forth the house comes Theonoe, the prophetess,
The palace echoes as the bolts are unfastened; fly! yet what use to
fly? For whether absent or present she knows of thy arrival here.
Ah me! how lost am I! Saved from Troy and from a barbarian land, thou
hast come only to fall a prey to barbarian swords.  (THEONOE enters,
attended by hand-maidens carrying torches.)  

THEONOE Lead on, bearing before me blazing brands, and, as sacred
rites ordain, purge with incense every cranny of the air, that I may
breathe heaven's breath free from taint; meanwhile do thou, in case
the tread of unclean feet have soiled the path, wave the cleansing
flame above it, and brandish the torch in front, that I may pass upon
my way. And when to heaven ye have paid the customs I exact, bear
back into the house the brand from off the hearth. What of my prophecy,
Helen? how stands it now? Thou hast seen thy husband Menelaus arrive
without disguise, reft of his ships, and of thy counterfeit. Ah, hapless
man! what troubles hast thou escaped, and art come hither, and yet
knowest not whether thou art to return or to abide here; for there
is strife in heaven, and Zeus this very day will sit in solemn conclave
on thee. Hera, who erst was thy bitter foe, is now grown kind, and
is willing to bring thee and thy wife safe home, that Hellas may learn
that the marriage of Paris was all a sham, assigned to him by Cypris;
but Cypris fain would mar thy homeward course, that she may not be
convicted, or proved to have bought the palm of beauty at the price
of Helen in a futile marriage. Now the decision rests with me, whether
to ruin thee, as Cypris wishes, by telling my brother of thy presence
bere, or to save thy life by taking Hera's side, concealing thy coming
from my brother, for his orders are that I should tell him, whensoe'er
thou shouldst reach these shores. Ho! one of you, go show my brother
this man is here, that I may secure my safety. 

HELEN Maiden, at thy knees I fall a suppliant, and seat myself in
this sad posture on behalf of myself and him, whom I am in danger
of seeing slain, after I have so hardly found him. Oh! tell not thy
brother that my husband is returned to these loving arms; save us,
I beseech thee; never for thy brother's sake sacrifice thy character
for uprightness, by evil and unjust means bidding for his favour.
For the deity hates violence, and biddeth all men get lawful gains
without plundering others. Wealth unjustly gotten, though it bring
some power, is to be eschewed. The breath of heaven and the earth
are man's common heritage, wherein to store his home, without taking
the goods of others, or wresting them away by force. Me did Hermes
at a critical time, to my sorrow, intrust to thy father's safe keeping
for this my lord, who now is here and wishes to reclaim me. But how
can he recover me if he be slain? How could thy sire restore the living
to the dead? Oh! consider ere that the will of heaven and thy father's
too; would the deity or would thy dead sire restore their neighbour's
goods, or would they forbear? restore them, I feel sure. It is not,
therefore, right that thou shouldst more esteem thy wanton brother
than thy righteous father. Yet if thou, prophetess as thou art and
believer in divine providence, shalt pervert the just intention of
thy father and gratify thy unrighteous brother, 'tis shameful thou
shouldst have full knowledge of the heavenly will, both what is and
what is not, and yet be ignorant of justice. Oh! save my wretched
life from the troubles which beset it, granting this as an accession
to our good fortune; for every living soul loathes Helen, seeing that
there is gone a rumour throughout Hellas that I was false unto my
lord, and took up my abode in Phrygia's sumptuous halls. Now, if I
come to Hellas, and set foot once more in Sparta, they will hear and
see how they were ruined by the wiles of goddesses, while was no traitress
to my friends after all; and so will they restore to me my virtuous
name again, and I shall give my daughter in marriage, whom no man
now will wed; and, leaving this vagrant life in Egypt, shall enjoy
the treasures in my home. Had Menelaus met his doom at some funeral
pyre, with tears should I be cherishing his memory in a far-off land,
but must lose him now when he is alive and safe? Ah! maiden, I beseech
thee, say not so; grant me this boon, I pray, and reflect thy father's
justice; for this is the fairest ornament of children, when the child
of a virtuous sire resembles its parents in character. 

LEADER Piteous thy pleading, and a piteous object thou! But I fain
would hear what Menelaus will say to save his life. 

MENELAUS I will not deign to throw myself at thy knees, or wet mine
eyes with tears; for were I to play the coward, I should most foully
blur my Trojan fame. And yet men say it shows a noble soul to let
the tear-drop fall in misfortune. But that will not be the honourable
course that I will choose in preference to bravery, if what I shall
say is honourable. Art thou disposed to save a stranger seeking in
mere justice to regain his wife, why then restore her and save us
likewise; if not, this will not be the first by many a time that I
have suffered, though thou wilt get an evil name. All that I deem
worthy of me and honest, all that will touch thy heart most nearly,
will I utter at the tomb of thy sire with regret for his loss. Old
king beneath this tomb of stone reposing, pay back thy trust! I ask
of thee my wife whom Zeus sent hither unto thee to keep for me. I
know thou canst never restore her to me thyself, for thou art dead;
but this thy daughter will never allow her father once so glorious,
whom I invoke in his grave, to bear a tarnished name; for the decision
rests with her now. Thee, too, great god of death, I call to my assistance,
who hast received full many a corpse, slain by me for Helen, and art
keeping thy wage; either restore those dead now to life again, or
compel the daughter to show herself a worthy equal of her virtuous
sire, and give me back my wife. But if ye will rob me of her, I will
tell you that which she omitted in her speech. Know then, maiden,
I by an oath am bound, first, to meet thy brother sword to sword,
when he or I must die-there is no alternative. But if he refuse to
meet me fairly front to front, and seek by famine to chase away us
suppliants twain at this tomb, I am resolved to slay Helen, and then
to plunge this two-edged sword through my own heart, upon the top
of the sepulchre, that our streaming blood may trickle down the tomb;
and our two corpses will be lying side by side upon this polished
slab, a source of deathless grief to thee, and to thy sire reproach.
Never shall thy brother wed Helen, nor shall any other; I will bear
her hence myself, if not to my house, at any rate to death. And why
this stern resolve? Were I to resort to women's ways and weep, I should
be a pitiful creature, not a man of action. Slay me, if it seems thee
good; I will not die ingloriously; but better yield to what I say,
that thou mayst act with justice, and I regain my wife. 

LEADER On thee, maiden, it rests to judge between these arguments.
Decide in such a way as to please one and all. 

THEONOE My nature and my inclination lean towards piety; myself,
too, I respect, and I will never sully my father's fair name, or gratify
my brother at the cost of bringing myself into open dishonour. For
justice hath her temple firmly founded in my nature, and since I have
this heritage from Nereus I will strive to save Menelaus; wherefore,
seeing it is Hera's will to stand thy friend, I will give my vote
with her. May Cypris be favourable to me! though in me she hath no
part, and I will try to remain a maid alway. As for thy reproaches
against my father at this tomb; lo! I have the same words to utter;
I should be wronging thee, did I not restore thy wife; for my sire,
were he living, would have given her back into thy keeping, and thee
to her. Yea, for there is recompense for these things as well amongst
the dead as amongst all those who breathe the breath of life. The
soul indeed of the dead lives no more, yet hath it a consciousness
that lasts for ever, eternal as the ether into which it takes the
final plunge. Briefly then to end the matter, I will observe strict
silence on all that ye prayed I should, and never with my counsel
will I aid my brother's wanton will. For I am doing him good service,
though he little thinks it, if turn him from his godless life to holiness.
Wherefore devise yourselves some way of escape; my lips are scaled;
I will not cross your path. First with the goddesses begin, and of
the one,-and that one Cypris,-Crave permission to return unto thy
country; and of Hera, that her goodwill may abide in the same quarter,
even her scheme to save thee and thy husband. And thou, my own dead
sire, shalt never, in so far as rests with me, lose thy holy name
to rank with evil-doers.  (THEONOE and her attendants enter the palace.)

LEADER No man ever prospered by unjust practices, but in a righteous
cause there is hope of safety. 

HELEN Menelaus, on the maiden's side are we quite safe. Thou must
from that point start, and by contributing thy advice, devise with
me a scheme to save ourselves. 

MENELAUS Hearken then; thou hast been a long while in the palace,
and art intimate with the king's attendants. 

HELEN What dost thou mean thereby? for thou art suggesting hopes,
as if resolved on some plan for our mutual help. 

MENELAUS Couldst thou persuade one of those who have charge of cars
and steeds to furnish us with a chariot? 

HELEN I might; but what escape is there for us who know nothing of
the country and the barbarian's kingdom? 

MENELAUS True; 'tis impossible. Well, supposing I conceal myself
in the palace and slay the king with this two-edged sword?

HELEN His sister would never refrain from telling her brother that
thou wert meditating his death. 

MENELAUS We have not so much as a ship to make our escape in; for
the sea. hath swallowed the one we had. 

HELEN Hear me, if haply even a woriian can utter words of wisdom.
Dost thou consent to be dead in word, though not really so?

MENELAUS 'Tis a bad omen; still, if by saying so I shall gain aught,
I am ready to be dead in word, though not in deed. 

HELEN I, too, will mourn thee with hair cut short and dirges, as
is women's way, before this impious wretch. 

MENELAUS What saving remedy doth this afford us twain? There is deception
in thy scheme. 

HELEN I will beg the king of this country leave to bury thee in a
cenotaph, as if thou hadst really died at sea. 

MENELAUS Suppose he grant it; how, e'en then, are we to escape without
a ship, after having committed me to my empty tomb? 

HELEN I will bid him give me a vessel, from which to let drop into
the sea's embrace thy funeral offerings. 

MENELAUS A clever plan in truth, save in one particular; suppose
he bid thee rear the tomb upon the strand, thy pretext comes to naught.

HELEN But I shall say it is not the custom in Hellas to bury those
who die at sea upon the shore. 

MENELAUS Thou removest this obstacle too; I then will sail with thee
and help stow the funeral garniture in the same ship. 

HELEN Above all, it is necessary that thou and all thy sailors who
escaped from the wreck should be at hand. 

MENELAUS Be sure if once I find a ship at her moorings, they shall
be there man for man, each with his sword. 

HELEN Thou must direct everything; only let there be winds to waft
our rails and a good ship to speed before them! 

MENELAUS So shall it be; for the deities will cause my troubles to
cease. But from whom wilt thou say thou hadst tidings of my death?

HELEN From thee; declare thyself the one and only survivor, telling
how thou wert sailing with the son of Atreus, and didst see him perish.

MENELAUS Of a truth the garments I have thrown about me, will bear
out my tale that they were rags collected from the wreckage.

HELEN They come in most opportunely, but they were near being lost
just at the wrong time. Maybe that misfortune will turn to fortune.

MENELAUS Am I to enter the palace with thee, or are we to sit here
at the tomb quietly? 

HELEN Abide here; for if the king attempts to do thee any mischief,
this tomb and thy good sword will protect thee. But I will go within
and cut off my hair, and exchange my white robe for sable weeds, and
rend my cheek with this hand's blood-thirsty nail. For 'tis a mighty
struggle, and I see two possible issues; either I must die if detected
in my plot, or else to my country shall I come and save thy soul alive.
O Hera! awful queen, who sharest the couch of Zeus, grant some respite
from their toil to two unhappy wretches; to thee I pray, tossing my
arms upward to heaven, where thou hast thy home in the star-spangled
firmament. Thou, too, that didst win the prize of beauty at the price
of my marriage; O Cypris! daughter of Dione, destroy me not utterly.
Thou hast injured me enough aforetime, delivering up my name, though
not my person, to live amongst barbarians. Oh! suffer me to die, if
death is thy desire, in my native land. Why art thou so insatiate
in mischief, employing every art of love, of fraud, and guileful schemes,
and spells that bring bloodshed on families? Wert thou but moderate,
only that!-in all else thou art by nature man's most well, come deity;
and I have reason so to say.  (HELEN enters the palace and MENELAUS
withdraws into the background.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Thee let me invoke, tearful Philomel, lurking 'neath the leafy covert
in thy place of song, most tuneful of all feathered songsters, oh!
come to aid me in my dirge, trilling through thy tawny throat, as
I sing the piteous woes of Helen, and the tearful fate of Trojan dames
made subject to Achaea's spear, on the day that there came to their
plains one who sped with foreign oar across the dashing billows, bringing
to Priam's race from Lacedaemon thee his hapless bride, Helen,-even
Paris, luckless bridegroom, by the guidance of Aphrodite.

(antistrophe 1)

And many an Achaean hath breathed his last amid the spearmen's thrusts
and hurtling hail of stones, and gone to his sad end; for these their
wives cut off their hair in sorrow, and their houses are left without
a bride; and one of the Achaeans, that had but a single ship, did
light a blazing beacon on sea-girt Euboea, and destroy full many of
them, wrecking them on the rocks of Caphareus and the shores that
front the Aegean main, by the treacherous gleam he kindled; when thou,
O Menelaus, from the very day of thy start, didst drift to harbourless
hills, far from thy country before the breath of the storm, bearing
on thy ship a prize that was no prize, but a phantom made by Hera
out of cloud for the Danai to struggle over. 

(strophe 2)

What mortal claims, by searching to the utmost limit, to have found
out the nature of God, or of his opposite, or of that which comes
between, seeing as he doth this world of man tossed to and fro by
waves of contradiction and strange vicissitudes? Thou, Helen, art
the daughter of Zeus; for thy sire was the bird that nestled in Leda's
bosom; and yet for all that art thou become a by-word for wickedness,
through the length and breadth of Hellas, as faithless, treacherous
wife and godless woman; nor can I tell what certainty is, whatever
may pass for it amongst men. That which gods pronounce have I found
true. 

(antistrophe 2)

O fools! all ye who try to win the meed of valour through war and
serried ranks of chivalry, seeking thus to still this mortal coil,
in senselessness; for if bloody contests are to decide, there will
never be any lack of strife in the towns of men; the maidens of the
land of Priam left their bridal bowers, though arbitration might have
put thy quarrel right, O Helen. And now Troy's sons are in Hades'
keeping in the world below, and fire hath darted on her walls, as
darts the flame of Zeus, and thou art bringing woe on woe to hapless
sufferers in their misery.  (THEOCLYMENUS and his hunting attendants
enter.)  

THEOCLYMENUS All hail, my father's tomb! I buried thee, Proteus,
at the place where men go out, that I might often greet thee; and
so, ever as I go out and in, I, thy son Theoclymenus call on thee,
father. Ho! servants, to the palace take my hounds and hunting nets!
How often have I blamed myself for never punishing those miscreants
with death! I have just heard that son of Hellas has come openly to
my land, escaping the notice of the guard, a spy maybe or a would-be
thief of Helen; death shall be his lot if only I can catch him. Ha!
I find all my plans apparently frustrated, the daughter of Tyndareus
has deserted her seat at the tomb and sailed away from my shores.
Ho! there, undo the bars, loose the horses from their stalls, bring
forth my chariot, servants, that the wife, on whom my heart is set,
may not get away from these shores unseen, for want of any trouble
I can take. Yet stay; for I see the object of my pursuit is still
in the palace, and has not fled.  (HELEN enters from the palace, clad
in the garb of mourning.)  How now, lady, why hast thou arrayed thee
in sable weeds instead of white raiment, and from thy fair head hast
shorn thy tresses with the steel, bedewing thy cheeks the while with
tears but lately shed? Is it in response to visions of the night that
thou art mourning, or, because thou hast heard some warning voice
within, art thus distraught with grief? 

HELEN My lord,-for already I have learnt to say that name,--I am
undone; my luck is gone; I cease to be. 

THEOCLYMENUS In what misfortune art thou plunged? What hath happened?

HELEN Menelaus, ah me! how can I say it? is dead, my husband.

THEOCLYMENUS How knowest thou? Did Theonoe tell thee this?

HELEN Both she, and one who was there when he perished.

THEOCLYMENUS What! hath one arrived who actually announces this for
certaint? 

HELEN One hath; oh may he come e'en as I wish him to! 

THEOCLYMENUS Who and where is he? that I may learn this more surely.

HELEN There he is, sitting crouched beneath the shelter of this tomb,

THEOCLYMENUS Great Apollo! how clad in unseemly rags! 

HELEN Ah me! methinks my own husband too is in like plight.

THEOCLYMENUS From what country is this fellow? whence landed he here?

HELEN From Hellas, one of the Achaeans who sailed with my husband.

THEOCLYMENUS What kind of death doth he declare that Menelaus died?

HELEN The most piteous of all; amid the watery waves at sea.

THEOCLYMENUS On what part of the savage ocean was he sailing?

HELEN Cast up on the harbourless rocks of Libya. 

THEOCLYMENUS How was it this man did not perish if he was with him
aboard? 

HELEN There are times when churls have more luck than their betters.

THEOCLYMENUS Where left he the wreck, on coming hither?

HELEN There, where perdition catch it, but not Menelaus!

THEOCLYMENUS He is lost; but on what vessel came this man?

HELEN According to his story sailors fell in with him and picked
him up. 

THEOCLYMENUS Where then is that ill thing that was sent to Troy in
thy stead? 

HELEN Dost mean the phantom-form of cloud? It hath passed into the
air. 

THEOCLYMENUS O Priam, and thou land of Troy, how fruitless thy ruin!

HELEN I too have shared with Priam's race their misfortunes.

THEOCLYMENUS Did this fellow leave thy husband unburied, or consign
him to the grave? 

HELEN Unburied; woe is me for my sad lot! 

THEOCLYMENUS Wherefore hast thou shorn the tresses of thy golden
hair? 

HELEN His memory lingers fondly in this heart, whate'er his fate.

THEOCLYMENUS Are thy tears in genuine sorrow for this calamity?

HELEN An easy task no doubt to escape thy sister's detection!

THEOCLYMENUS No, surely; impossible. Wilt thou still make this tomb
thy abode? 

HELEN Why jeer at me? canst thou not let the dead man be?

THEOCLYMENUS No, thy loyalty to thy husband's memory makes thee fly
from me. 

HELEN I will do so no more; prepare at once for my marriage.

THEOCLYMENUS Thou hast been long in bringing thyself to it; still
I do commend the now. 

HELEN Dost know thy part? Let us forget the past. 

THEOCLYMENUS On what terms? One good turn deserves another.

HELEN Let us make peace; be reconciled to me. 

THEOCLYMENUS I relinquish my quarrel with thee; let it take wings
and fly away. 

HELEN Then by thy knees, since thou art my friend indeed,-

THEOCLYMENUS What art so bent on winning, that to me thou stretchest
out a suppliant hand? 

HELEN My dead husband would I fain bury. 

THEOCLYMENUS What tomb can be bestowed on lost bodies? Wilt thou
bury a shade? 

HELEN In Hellas we have a custom, whene'er one is drowned at sea-

THEOCLYMENUS What is your custom? The race of Pelops truly hath some
skill in matters such as this. 

HELEN To hold a burial with woven robes that wrap no corpse.

THEOCLYMENUS Perform the ceremony; rear the tomb where'er thou wilt.

HELEN 'Tis not thus we give drowned sailors burial. 

THEOCLYMENUS How then? I know nothing of your customs in Hellas.

HELEN We unmoor, and carry out to sea all that is the dead man's
due. 

THEOCLYMENUS What am I to give thee then for thy dead husband?

HELEN Myself I cannot say; I had no such experience in my previous
happy life. 

THEOCLYMENUS Stranger, thou art the bearer of tidings I welcome.

MENELAUS Well, I do not, nor yet doth the dead man. 

THEOCLYMENUS How do ye bury those who have been drowned at sea?

MENELAUS Each according to his means. 

THEOCLYMENUS As far as wealth goes, name thy wishes for this lady's
sake. 

MENELAUS There must be a blood-offering first to the dead.

THEOCLYMENUS Blood of what? Do thou show me and I will comply.

MENELAUS Decide that thyself; whate'er thou givest will suffice.

THEOCLYMENUS Amongst barbarians 'tis customary to sacrifice a horse
or bull, 

MENELAUS If thou givest at all, let there be nothing mean in thy
gift. 

THEOCLYMENUS I have no lack of such in my rich herds 

MENELAUS Next an empty bier is decked and carried in procession.

THEOCLYMENUS It shall be so; what else is it customary to add?

MENELAUS Bronze arms; for war was his delight. 

THEOCLYMENUS These will be worthy of the race of Pelops, and these
will we give. 

MENELAUS And with them all the fair increase of productive earth.

THEOCLYMENUS And next, how do ye pour these offerings into the billows?

MENELAUS There must be a ship ready and rowers. 

THEOCLYMENUS How far from the shore does the ship put out?

MENELAUS So far that the foam in her wake can scarce be seen from
the strand. 

THEOCLYMENUS Why so? wherefore doth Hellas observe this custom?

MENELAUS That the billow may not cast up again our expiatory offerings.

THEOCLYMENUS Phoenician rowers will soon cover the distance.

MENELAUS 'Twill be well done, and gratifying to Menelaus, too.

THEOCLYMENUS Canst thou not perform these rites well enough without
Helen? 

MENELAUS This task belongs to mother, wife, or children.

THEOCLYMENUS 'Tis her task then, according to thee, to bury her husband.

MENELAUS To be sure; piety demands that the dead be not robbed of
their due. 

THEOCLYMENUS Well, let her go; 'tis my interest to foster piety in
a wife. And thou, enter the house and choose adornment for the dead.
Thyself, too, will not send empty-handed away, since thou hast done
her a service. And for the good news thou hast brought me, thou shalt
receive raiment instead of going bare, and food, too, that thou mayst
reach thy country; for as it is, I see thou art in sorry plight. As
for thee, poor lady, waste not thyself in a hopeless case; Menelaus
has met his doom, and thy dead husband cannot come to life.

MENELAUS This then is thy duty, fair young wife; be content with
thy present husband, and forget him who has no existence; for this
is thy best course in face of what is happening. And if ever I come
to Hellas and secure my safety, I will clear thee of thy former ill-repute,
if thou prove a dutiful wife to thy true husband. 

HELEN I will; never shall my husband have cause to blame me; thou
shalt thyself attend us and be witness thereto. Now go within, poor
wanderer, and seek the bath, and change thy raiment. I will show my
kindness to thee, and that without delay. For thou wilt perform all
service due with kindlier feeling for my dear lord Menelaus, if at
my hands thou meet with thy deserts.  (THEOCLYMENUS, HELEN, MENELAUS
enter the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Through wooded glen, o'er torrent's flood, and ocean's booming waves
rushed the mountain-goddess, mother of the gods, in frantic haste,
once long ago, yearning for her daughter lost, whose name men dare
not utter; loudly rattled the Bacchic castanets in shrill accord,
what time those maidens, swift as whirlwinds, sped forth with the
goddess on her chariot yoked to wild creatures, in quest of her that
was ravished from the circling choir of virgins; here was Artemis
with her bow, and there the grim-eyed goddess, sheathed in mail, and
spear in hand. But Zeus looked down from his throne in heaven, and
turned the issue otherwhither. 

(antistrophe 1)

Soon as the mother ceased from her wild wandering toil, in seeking
her daughter stolen so subtly as to baffle all pursuit, she crossed
the snow-capped heights of Ida's nymphs; and in anguish cast her down
amongst the rocks and brushwood deep in snow; and, denying to man
all increase to his tillage from those barren fields, she wasted the
human race; nor would she let the leafy tendrils yield luxuriant fodder
for the cattle, wherefore many a beast lay dying; no sacrifice was
offered to the gods, and on the altars were no cakes to burn; yea,
and she made the dew-fed founts of crystal water to cease their flow,
in her insatiate sorrow for her child. 

(strophe 2)

But when for gods and tribes of men alike she made an end to festal
cheer, Zeus spoke out, seeking to soothe the mother's moody soul,
"Ye stately Graces, go banish from Demeter's angry heart the grief
her wanderings bring upon her for her child, and go, ye Muses too,
with tuneful choir." Thereon did Cypris, fairest of the blessed gods,
first catch up the crashing cymbals, native to that land, and the
drum with tight-stretched skin, and then Demeter smiled, and in her
hand. did take the deep-toned flute, well pleased with its loud note.

(antistrophe 2)

Thou hast wedded as thou never shouldst have done in defiance of
all right, and thou hast incurred, my daughter, the wrath of the great
mother by disregarding her sacrifices. Oh! mighty is the virtue in
dress of dappled fawn-skin, in ivy green that twineth round a sacred
thyrsus, in whirling tambourines struck as they revolve in air in
tresses wildly streaming for the revelry of Bromius, and likewise
in the sleepless vigils of the goddess, when the moon looks down and
sheds her radiance o'er the scene. Thou wert confident in thy charms
alone.  (HELEN comes out of the palace alone.)  

HELEN My friends, within the palace all goes well for us; for the
daughter of Proteus, who is privy to our stealthy scheme, told her
brother nothing when questioned as to my husband's coming, but for
my sake declared him dead and buried. Most fortunate it is my lord
hath had the luck to get these weapons; for he is now himself clad
in the harness he was to plunge into the sea, his stalwart arm thrust
through the buckler's strap, and in his right hand a spear, on pretence
of joining in homage to the dead. He hath girded himself most serviceably
for the fray, as if to triumph o'er a host of barbarian foes when
once we are aboard yon oared ship; instead of his rags from the wreck
hath he donned the robes I gave for his attire, and I have bathed
his limbs in water from the stream, a bath he long hath wanted. But
I must be silent, for from the house comes forth the man who thinks
he has me in his power, prepared to be his bride; and thy goodwill
I also claim and thy strict silence, if haply, when we save ourselves,
we may save thee too some day.  (THEOCLYMENUS and MENELAUS enter,
with a train of attendants bearing the offerings for the funeral rites.)

THEOCLYMENUS Advance in order, servants, as the stranger hath directed,
bearing the funeral gifts the sea demands. But thou, Helen, if thou
wilt not misconstrue my words, be persuaded and here abide; for thou
wilt do thy husband equal service whether thou art present or not.
For I am afraid that some sudden shock of fond regret may prompt thee
to plunge into the swollen tide, in an ecstasy of gratitude toward
thy former husband; for thy grief for him, though he is lost, is running
to excess. 

HELEN O my new lord, needs must I honour him with whom I first shared
married joys; for I could even die with my husband, so well I loved
him; yet how could he thank me, were I to share death's doom with
him? Still, let me go and pay his funeral rites unto the dead in person.
The gods grant thee the boon I wish and this stranger too, for the
assistance he is lending here! And thou shalt find in me a wife fit
to share thy house, since thou art rendering kindness to Menelaus
and to me; for surely these events are to some good fortune tending.
But now appoint someone to give us a ship wherein to convey these
gifts, that I may find thy kindness made complete. 

THEOCLYMENUS  (to an attendant) Go thou, and furnish them with a
Sidonian galley of fifty oars and rowers also. 

HELEN Shall not he command the ship who is ordering the funeral?

THEOCLYMENUS Most certainly; my sailors are to obey him.

HELEN Repeat the order, that they may clearly understand thee.

THEOCLYMENUS I repeat it, and will do so yet again if that is thy
pleasure. 

HELEN Good luck to thee and to me in my designs! 

THEOCLYMENUS Oh! waste not thy fair complexion with excessive weeping.

HELEN This day shall show my gratitude to thee. 

THEOCLYMENUS The state of the dead is nothingness; to toil for them
is vain. 

HELEN In what I say, this world, as well as that, hath share.

THEOCLYMENUS Thou shalt not find in me a husband at all inferior
to Menelaus. 

HELEN With thee have I no fault to find; good luck is all I need.

THEOCLYMENUS That rests with thyself, if thou show thyself a loving
wife to me. 

HELEN This is not a lesson I shall have to learn now, to love my
friends. 

THEOCLYMENUS Is it thy wish that I should escort thee in person with
active aid? 

HELEN God forbid! become not thy servant's servant, O king!

THEOCLYMENUS Up and away! I am not concerned with customs which the
race of Pelops holds. My house is pure, for Menelaus did not die here;
go some one now and bid my vassal chiefs bring marriage-offerings
to my palace; for the whole earth must re-echo in glad accord the
hymn of my wedding with Helen, to make men envious. Go, stranger,
and pour into the sea's embrace these offerings to Helen's former
lord, and then speed back again with my bride, that after sharing
with me her marriage-feast thou mayst set out for home, or here abide
in happiness.  (THEOCLYMENUS and his retinue enter the palace.)

MENELAUS O Zeus, who art called the father of all and god of wisdom,
look down on us and change our woe to joy! Lend us thy ready help,
as we seek to drag our fortunes up the rugged hill; if with but thy
finger-tip thou touch us, we shall reach our longed-for goal. Sufficient
are the troubles we ere this have undergone. Full oft have I invoked
you gods to near my joys and sorrows; I do not deserve to be for ever
unhappy, but to advance and prosper. Grant me but this one boon, and
so will ye crown my future with blessing.  (MENELAUS, HELEN and their
train of attendants depart.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Hail! thou swift Phoenician ship of Sidon! dear to the rowers, mother
to the foam, leader of fair dolphins' gambols, what time the deep
is hushed and still, and Ocean's azure child, the queen of calm, takes
up her parable and says: "Away! and spread your canvas to the ocean-breeze.
Ho! sailors, ho! come grip your oars of pine, speeding Helen on her
way to the sheltered beach where Perseus dwelt of yore."

(antistrophe 1)

It may be thou wilt find the daughters of Leucippus beside the brimming
river or before the temple of Pallas, when at last with dance and
revelry thou joinest in the merry midnight festival of Hyacinthus,
him whom Phoebus slew in the lists by a quoit hurled o'er the mark;
wherefore did the son of Zeus ordain that Laconia's land should set
apart that day for sacrifice; there too shalt thou find the tender
maid, whom ye left in your house, for as yet no nuptial torch has
shed its light for her. 

(strophe 2)

Oh! for wings to cleave the air in the track of Libyan cranes, whose
serried ranks leave far behind the wintry storm at the shrill summons
of some veteran leader, who raises his exultant cry as he wings his
way o'er plains that know no rain and yet bear fruitful increase.
Ye feathered birds with necks outstretched, comrades of the racing
clouds, on on! till ye reach the Pleiads in their central station
and Orion, lord of the night; and as ye settle on Eurotas' banks proclaim
the glad tidings that Menelaus hath sacked the city of Dardanus, and
will soon be home. 

(antistrophe 2)

Ye sons of Tyndareus at length appear, speeding in your chariot through
the sky, denizens of heaven's courts beneath the radiant whirling
stars, guide this lady Helen safely o'er the azure main, across the
foam-flecked billows of the deep-blue sea, sending the mariners a
favouring gale from Zeus; and from your sister snatch the ill-repute
of wedding with a barbarian, even the punishment bequeathed to her
from that strife on Ida's mount, albeit she never went to the land
of Ilium, to the battlements of Phoebus.  (The SECOND MESSENGER enters
in haste, as THEOCLYMENUS comes out of the palace.)  

SECOND MESSENGER O king, at last have I found thee in the palace;
for new tidings of woe art thou soon to hear from me. 

THEOCLYMENUS How now? 

MESSENGER Make haste to woo a new wife; for Helen hath escaped.

THEOCLYMENUS Borne aloft on soaring wings, or treading still the
earth? 

MESSENGER Menelaus has succeeded in bearing her hence; 'twas he that
brought the news of his own death. 

THEOCLYMENUS O monstrous story! what ship conveyed her from these
shores? Thy tale is past belief. 

MESSENGER The very ship thou didst thyself give the stranger; and
that thou mayest briefly know all, he is gone, taking thy sailors
with him. 

THEOCLYMENUS How was it? I long to know, for I never thought that
a single arm could master all those sailors with whom thou wert despatched.

MESSENGER Soon as the daughter of Zeus had left this royal mansion
and come unto the sea, daintily picking her way, most craftily she
set to mourn her husband, though he was not dead but at her side.
Now when we reached thy docks well walled, we began to launch the
fastest of Sidonian ships, with her full complement of fifty rowers,
and each task in due succession followed; some set up the mast, others
ranged the oars with their blades ready, and stored the white sails
within the hold, and the rudder was let down astern and fastened securely.
While we were thus employed, those Hellenes, who had been fellow-voyagers
with Menelaus, were watching us, it seems, and they drew nigh the
beach, clad in the rags of shipwrecked men,-well built enough, but
squalid to look upon. And the son of Atreus, directly he saw them
approach, bespoke them, craftily introducing the reason for his mourning:
"Ye hapless mariners, how have ye come hither? your Achaean ship where
wrecked? Are ye here to help bury dead Atreus' son, whose missing
body this lady, daughter of Tyndareas, is honouring with a cenotaph?"
Then they with feigned tears proceeded to the ship, bearing aboard
the offerings to be thrown into the deep for Menelaus. Thereat were
we suspicious, and communed amongst ourselves regarding the number
of extra voyagers; but still we kept silence out of respect for thy
orders, for by intrusting the command of the vessel to the stranger
thou didst thus spoil all. Now the other victims gave no trouble,
and we easily put them aboard; only the bull refused to go forward
along the gangway, but rolled his eyes around and kept bellowing,
and, arching his back and glaring askance towards his horns, he would
not let us touch him. But Helen's lord cried out: "O! ye who laid
waste the town of Ilium, come pick up yon bull, the dead man's offering,
on your stout shoulders, as is the way in Hellas, and cast him into
the hold;" and as he spoke he drew his sword in readiness. Then they
at his command came and caught up the bull and carried him bodily
on to the deck. And Menelaus stroked the horse on neck and brow, coaxing
it to go aboard. At length, when the ship was fully freighted, Helen
climbed the ladder with graceful step and took her seat midway betwixt
the rowers' benches, and he sat by her side, even Menelaus who was
called dead; and the rest, equally divided on the right and left side
of the ship, sat them down, each beside his man, with swords concealed
beneath their cloaks, and the billows soon were echoing to the rowers'
song, as we heard the boatswain's note. Now when we were put out a
space, not very far nor very near, the helmsman asked, "Shall we,
sir stranger, sail yet further on our course, or will this serve?
For thine it is to command the ship." And he answered: "'Tis far enough
for me," while in his right hand he gripped his sword and stepped
on to the prow; then standing o'er the bull to slay it, never a word
said he of any dead man, but cut its throat and thus made prayer:
"Poseidon, lord of the sea, whose home is in the deep, and ye holy
daughters of Nereus, bring me and my wife safe and sound to Nauplia's
strand from hence! Anon a gush of blood, fair omen for the stranger,
spouted into the tide. One cried, "There is treachery in this voyage;
why should we now sail to Nauplia? Give the order, helmsman, turn
thy rudder." But the son of Atreus, standing where he slew the bull,
called to his comrades, "Why do ye, the pick of Hellas, delay to smite
and slay the barbarians and fling them from the ship into the waves?"
While to thy crew the boatswain cried the opposite command: "Ho! some
of you catch up chance spars, break up the benches, or snatch the
oar-blade from the thole, and beat out the brains of these our foreign
foes." Forthwith up sprang each man, the one part armed with poles
that sailors use, the other with swords. And the ship ran down with
blood; while Helen from her seat upon the stern thus cheered them
on: "Where is the fame ye won in Troy? show it against these barbarians."
Then as they hasted to the fray, some would fall and some rise up
again, while others hadst thou seen laid low in death. But Menelaus
in full armour, made his way, sword in hand, to any point where his
watchful eye perceived his comrades in distress; so we leapt from
the ship and swam, and he cleared the benches of thy rowers. Then
did the prince set himself to steer, and bade them make a straight
course to Hellas. So they set up the mast, and favouring breezes blew;
and they are clear away, while I, from death escaped, let myself down
by the anchor chain into the sea; and, just as I was spent, one threw
me a rope and rescued me, and drew me to land to bring to thee this
message. Ah! there is naught more serviceable to mankind than a prudent
distrust. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS I would never have believed that Menelaus could
have eluded us and thee, O king, in the way he did on his coming.

THEOCLYMENUS Woe is me! cozened by a woman's tricks! My bride hath
escaped me. If the ship could have been pursued and overtaken, I would
have used every means forthwith to catch the strangers; as it is,
I will avenge myself upon my treacherous sister, in that she saw Menelaus
in my palace and did not tell me. Wherefore shall she nevermore deceive
another by her prophetic art.  (A SERVANT comes out of the palace.)

SERVANT Ho, there! whither away so fast, my lord? on what bloody
thought intent? 

THEOCLYMENUS Whither justice calls me. Out of my path! 

SERVANT I will not loose thy robe, for on grievous mischief art thou
bent. 

THEOCLYMENUS Shalt thou, a slave, control thy master? 

SERVANT Yea, for I am in my senses. 

THEOCLYMENUS I should not say so, if thou wilt not let me

SERVANT Nay, but that I never will. 

THEOCLYMENUS Slay my sister most accursed. 

SERVANT Say rather, most righteous. 

THEOCLYMENUS "Righteous?" She who betrayed me? 

SERVANT There is an honourable treachery, which 'tis right to commit.

THEOCLYMENUS By giving my bride to another? 

SERVANT Only to those who had a better right. 

THEOCLYMENUS Who hath any rights o'er mine? 

SERVANT He that received her from her father. 

THEOCLYMENUS Nay, but fortune gave her to me. 

SERVANT And destiny took her away. 

THEOCLYMENUS "Tis not for thee to decide my affairs. 

SERVANT Only supposing mine be the better counsel. 

THEOCLYMENUS So I am thy subject, not thy ruler. 

SERVANT Aye, a subject bound to do the right, and eschew the wrong.

THEOCLYMENUS It seems thou art eager to be slain. 

SERVANT Slay me; thy sister shalt thou never slay with my consent,
but me perchance; for to die for their masters is the fairest death
that noble slaves can find.  (THE DIOSCURI appear from above.)

DIOSCURI Restrain those bursts of rage that hurry thee to undue lengths,
Theoclymenus, king of this country. We are the twin sons of Zeus that
call to thee by name, whom Leda bore one day, with Helen too who hath
fled from thy palace. For thou art wroth for a marriage never destined
for thee; nor is thy sister Theonoe, daughter of a Nereid goddess,
wronging thee because she honours the word of God and her father's
just behests. For it was ordained that Helen should abide within thy
halls up till the present time, but since Troy is razed to the ground
and she hath lent her name to the goddesses, no longer need she stay,
now must she be united in the self-same wedlock as before, and reach
her home and share it with her husband. Withhold then thy malignant
blade from thy sister, and believe that she herein is acting with
discretion. Long, long ago had we our sister saved, seeing that Zeus
has made us gods, but we were too weak for destiny as well as the
deities, who willed these things to be. This is my bidding to thee;
while to my sister I say, "Sail on with thy husband; and ye shall
have a prosperous breeze; for we, thy brethren twain, will course
along the deep and bring you safely to your fatherland. And when at
last thy goal is reached and thy life ended, thou shalt be famous
as a goddess, and with thy twin brethren share the drink-offering,
and like us receive gifts from men, for such is the will of Zeus.
Yea, and that spot where the son o Maia first appointed thee a home
when from Sparta he removed thee, after stealing an image of thee
from Heaven's mansions to prevent thy marriage with Paris, even the
isle that lies like a sentinel along the Attic coast, shall henceforth
be called by thy name amongst men, for that it welcomed thee when
stolen from thy home. Moreover, Heaven ordains that the wanderer Menelaus
shall find a home within an island of the blest; for to noble souls
hath the deity no dislike, albeit these oft suffer more than those
of no account." 

THEOCLYMENUS Ye sons of Leda and of Zeus, I will forego my former
quarrel about your sister, nor no longer seek to slay mine own. Let
Helen to her home repair, if such is Heaven's pleasure. Ye know that
ye are sprung of the same stock as your sister, best of women, chastest
too; hail then for the true nobility of Helen's soul, a quality too
seldom found amongst her sex! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Many are the forms the heavenly will assumes;
and many a thing God brings to pass contrary to expectation: that
which was looked for is not accomplished, while Heaven finds out a
way for what we never hoped; e'en such has been the issue here.

 THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the altar and temple of Zeus at Marathon. IOLAUS, an old man,
and the children of Heracles are seen on the steps of the
altar.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

IOLAUS I hold this true, and long have held: Nature hath made one
man upright for his neighbours' good, while another hath a disposition
wholly given over to gain, useless alike to the state and difficult
to have dealings with, but for himself the best of men; and this I
know, not from mere hearsay. For I, from pure regard and reverence
for my kith and kin, though might have lived at peace in Argos, alone
of all my race shared with Heracles his labours, while he was yet
with us, and now that he dwells in heaven, I keep these his children
safe beneath my wing, though myself need protection. For when their
father passed from earth away, Eurystheus would first of all have
slain us, but we escaped. And though our home is lost, our life was
saved. But in exile we wander from city to city, ever forced to roam.
For, added to our former wrongs, Eurystheus thought it fit to put
this further outrage upon us: wheresoe'er he heard that we were settling,
thither would he send heralds demanding our surrender and driving
us from thence, holding out this threat, that Argos is no meal city
to make a friend or foe, and furthermore pointing to his own prosperity.
So they, seeing how weak my means, and these little ones left without
a father, bow to his superior might and drive us from their land.
And I share the exile of these children, and help them bear their
evil lot by my sympathy, loth to betray them, lest someone say, "Look
you! now that the children's sire is dead, Iolaus no more protects
them, kinsman though he is." Not one corner left us in the whole of
Hellas, we are come to Marathon and its neighbouring land, and here
we sit as suppliants at the altars of the gods, and pray their aid;
for 'tis said two sons of Theseus dwell upon these plains, the lot
of their inheritance, scions of Pandion's stock, related to these
children; this the reason we have come on this our way to the borders
of glorious Athens. To lead the flight two aged guides are we; my
care is centred on these boys, while she, I mean Alcmena, clasps her
son's daughter in her arms, and bears her for safety within this shrine,
for we shrink from letting tender maidens come anigh the crowd or
stand as suppliants at the altar. Now Hvllus and the elder of his
brethren are seeking some place for us to find a refuge, if we are
driven by force from this land. O children, children, come hither!
hold unto my robe; for lo! I see a herald coming towards us from Eurystheus,
by whom we are persecuted, wanderers excluded from every land. A curse
on the and him that sent thee, hateful wretch! for that same tongue
of thine hath oft announced its master's evil hests to these children's
noble sire as well.  (COPREUS, the herald of EURYSTHEUS, enters.)

COPREUS Doubtless thy folly lets thee think this is a good position
to have taken up, and that thou art come to a city that will help
thee. No! there is none that will prefer thy feeble arm to the might
of Eurystheus. Begone! why take this trouble? Thou must arise and
go to Argos, where awaits thee death by stoning. 

IOLAUS Not so, for the god's altar will protect me, and this land
of freedom, wherein we have set foot. 

COPREUS Wilt give me the trouble of laying hands on thee?

IOLAUS By force at least shalt thou never drag these children hence.

COPREUS That shalt thou soon learn; it seems thou wert a poor prophet,
after all, in this.  (COPREUS seizes the children.)  

IOLAUS This shall never happen while I live. 

COPREUS Begone! for I will take them hence, for all thy refusals,
for I hold that they belong to Eurystheus, as they do indeed.  (He
throws IOLAUS to the ground.)  

IOLAUS Help, ye who long have had your home in Athens! we suppliants
at Zeus' altar in your market-place are being haled by force away,
our sacred wreaths defiled, shame to your city, to the gods dishonour.
(The CHORUS OF AGED ATHENIANS enters.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Hark, hark! What cry is this that rises near
the altar? At once explain the nature of the trouble. 

IOLAUS See this aged frame hurled in its feebleness upon the ground!
Woe is me! 

LEADER Who threw thee down thus pitiably? 

IOLAUS Behold the man who flouts your gods, kind sirs, and tries
by force to drag me from my seat before the altar of Zeus.

CHORUS  (chanting) From what land, old stranger, art thou come to
this confederate state of four cities? or have ye left Euboea's cliffs,
and, with the oar that sweeps the sea, put in here from across the
firth? 

IOLAUS Sirs, no island life I lead, but from Mycenae to thy land
I come. 

CHORUS  (chanting) What do they call thee, aged sir, those folk in
Mycenae? 

IOLAUS Maybe ye have heard of Iolaus, the comrade of Heracles, for
he was not unknown to fame. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Yea, I have heard of him in bygone days; but tell
me, whose are the tender boys thou bearest in thine arms?

IOLAUS These, sirs, are the sons of Heracles, come as suppliants
to you and your city. 

CHORUS  (chanting) What is their quest? Are they anxious, tell me,
to obtain an audience of the state? 

IOLAUS That so they may escape surrender, nor be torn with violence
from thy altars, and brought to Argos. 

COPREUS Nay, this will nowise satisfy thy masters, who o'er thee
have a right, and so have tracked thee hither. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Stranger, 'tis but right we should reverence the
gods' suppliants, suffering none with violent hand to make them leave
the altars, for that will dread justice ne'er permit. 

COPREUS Do thou then drive these subjects of Eurystheus forth, and
this hand of mine shall abstain from violence. 

CHORUS  (chanting) 'Twere impious for the state to neglect the suppliant
stranger's prayer. 

COPREUS Yet 'tis well to keep clear of troubles, by adopting that
counsel, which is the wiser. 

LEADER Thou then shouldst have told the monarch of this land thy
errand before being so bold, out of regard to his country's freedom,
instead of trying to drag strangers by force from the altars of the
gods. 

COPREUS Who is monarch of this land and state? 

LEADER Demophon, son of gallant Theseus. 

COPREUS Surely it were most to the purpose to discuss this matter
somewhat with him; all else has been said in vain. 

LEADER Lo! here he comes in person, in hot haste, and Acamas his
brother, to hear what thou hast to say.  (DEMOPHON, Acamas, and their
retinue enter.)  

DEMOPHON Since thou for all thy years hast outstripped younger men
in coming to the rescue to this altar of Zeus, do thou tell me what
hath chanced to bring this crowd together. 

LEADER There sit the sons of Heracles as suppliants, having wreathed
the altar, as thou seest, O king, and with them is Iolaus, trusty
comrade of their sire. 

DEMOPHON Why should this event have called for cries of pain?

LEADER  (turning to COPREUS) This fellow caused the uproar by trying
to drag them forcibly from this altar, and he hurled down the old
man, till my tears for pity flowed. 

DEMOPHON Hellenic dress and fashion in his robes doth he no doubt
adopt, but deeds like these betray the barbarian. Thou, sirrah, tell
me straight the country whence thou camest thither. 

COPREUS An Argive I; since that thou seek'st to know. Who sent me,
and the object of my coming, will I freely tell. Eurystheus, king
of Mycenae, sends me hither to fetch these back; and I have come,
sir stranger, with just grounds in plenty, alike for speech or action.
An Argive myself, Argives I come to fetch, taking with me these runaways
from my native city, on whom the doom of death was passed by our laws
there; and we have right, since we rule our city independently, to
ratify its sentences. And though they have come as suppliants to the
altars of numerous others, we have taken our stand on these same arguments,
and no one has ventured to bring upon himself evils of his own getting.
But they have come hither, either because they perceived some folly
in thee, or, in their perplexity, staking all on one risky throw to
win or lose; for surely they do not suppose that thou, if so thou
hast thy senses still, and only thou, in all the breadth of Hellas
they have traversed, wilt pity their foolish troubles. Come now, put
argument against argument: what will be thy gain, suppose thou admit
them to thy land, or let us take them hence? From us these benefits
are thine to win: this city can secure as friends Argos, with its
far-reaching arm, and Eurystheus' might complete; whilst if thou lend
an ear to their piteous pleading and grow soft, the matter must result
in trial of arms; for be sure we shall not yield this struggle without
appealing to the sword. What pretext wilt thou urge? Of what domains
art thou robbed that thou shouldst take and wage war with the Tirynthian
Argives? What kind of allies art thou aiding? For whom will they have
fallen whom thou buriest? Surely thou wilt get an evil name from the
citizens, if for the sake of an old man near the grave, a mere shadow
I may say, and for these children, thou wilt plunge into troublous
waters. The best thou canst say is, that thou wilt find in them a
hope, and nothing more; and yet this falls far short of the present
need; for these would be but a poor match for Argives even when fully
armed and in their prime, if haply that raises thy spirits; moreover,
the time 'twixt now and then is long, wherein ye may be blotted out.
Nay, hearken to me; give me naught, but let me take mine own, and
so gain Mycenae; but forbear to act now, as is your Athenian way,
and take the weaker side, when it is in thy power to choose the stronger
as thy friends. 

LEADER Who can decide a cause or ascertain its merits, till from
both sides he clearly learn what they would say? 

IOLAUS O king, in thy land I start with this advantage, the right
to hear and speak in turn, and none, ere that, will drive me hence
as elsewhere they would. 'Twixt us and him is naught in common, for
we no longer have aught to do with Argos since that decree was passed,
but we are exiles from our native land; how then can he justly drag
us back as subjects of Mycenae, seeing that they have banished us?
For we are strangers. Or do ye claim that every exile from Argos is
exiled from the bounds of Hellas? Not from Athens surely; for ne'er
will she for fear of Argos drive the children of Heracles from her
land. Here is no Trachis, not at all; no! nor that Achaean town, whence
thou, defying justice, but boasting of the might of Argos in the very
words thou now art using, didst drive the suppliants from their station
at the altar. If this shall be, and they thy words approve, why then
I trow this is no more Athens, the home of freedom. Nay, but I know
the temper and nature of these citizens; they would rather die, for
honour ranks before mere life with men of worth. Enough of Athens!
for excessive praise is apt to breed disgust; and oft ere now have
myself felt vexed at praise that knows no bounds. But to thee, as
ruler of this land, fain would show the reason why thou art bound
to save these children. Pittheus was the son of Pelops; from him sprung
Aethra, and from her Theseus thy sire was born. And now will I trace
back these children's lineage for thee. Heracles was son of Zeus and
Alcmena; Alcmena sprang from Pelops' daughter; therefore thy father
and their father would be the sons of first cousins. Thus then art
thou to them related, O Demophon, but thy just debt to them beyond
the ties of kinship do I now declare to thee; for I assert, in days
gone by, I was with Theseus on the ship, as their father's squire,
when they went to fetch that girdle fraught with death; yea, and from
Hades' murky dungeons did Heracles bring thy father up; as all Hellas
doth attest. Wherefore in return they crave this boon of thee, that
they be not surrendered up nor torn by force from the altars of thy
gods and cast forth from the land. For this were shame on thee, and
hurtful likewise in thy state, should suppliants, exiles, kith and
kin of thine, be haled away by force. In pity cast one glance at them.
I do entreat thee, laying my suppliant bough upon thee, by thy hands
and beard, slight not the sons of Heracles, now that thou hast them
in thy power to help. Show thyself their kinsman and their friend;
be to them father, brother, lord; for better each and all of these
than to fall beneath the Argives' hand. 

LEADER O king, I pity them, hearing their sad lot. Now more than
ever do see noble birth o'ercome by fortune; for these, though sprung
from noble sire, are suffering what they ne'er deserved.

DEMOPHON Three aspects of the circumstance constrain me, Iolaus,
not to spurn the guests thou bringest; first and foremost, there is
Zeus, at whose altar thou art seated with these tender children gathered
round thee; next come ties of kin, and the debt I owe to treat them
kindly for their father's sake; and last, mine honour, which before
all I must regard; for if I permit this altar to be violently despoiled
by stranger hands, men will think the land I inhabit is free no more,
and that through fear I have surrendered suppliants to Argives, and
this comes nigh to make one hang oneself. Would that thou hadst come
under a luckier star! yet, as it is, fear not that any man shall tear
thee and these children from the altar by force.  (to COPREUS)  Get
thee to Argos and tell Eurystheus so; yea and more, if he have any
charge against these strangers, he shall have justice; but never shalt
thou drag them hence. 

COPREUS Not even if I have right upon my side and prove my case?

DEMOPHON How can it be right to drag the suppliant away by force?

COPREUS Well, mine is the disgrace; no harm will come to thee.

DEMOPHON 'Tis harm to me, if I let them be haled away by thee.

COPREUS Banish them thyself, and then will I take them from elsewhere.

DEMOPHON Nature made thee a fool, to think thou knowest better than
the god. 

COPREUS It seems then evildoers are to find a refuge here.

DEMOPHON A temple of the gods is an asylum open to the world.

COPREUS Maybe they will not take this view in Mycenae. 

DEMOPHON What! am I not lord of this domain? 

COPREUS So long as thou injure not the Argives, and if wise, thou
wilt not. 

DEMOPHON Be injured for all I care, provided I sin not against the
gods. 

COPREUS I would not have thee come to blows with Argos.

DEMOPHON I am of like mind in this; but I will not dismiss these
from my protection. 

COPREUS For all that, I shall take and drag my own away.

DEMOPHON Why then perhaps thou wilt find a difficulty in returning
to Argos. 

COPREUS That shall I soon find out by making the attempt.

DEMOPHON Touch them and thou shalt rue it, and that without delay.

LEADER I conjure thee, never dare to strike a herald. 

DEMOPHON Strike I will, unless that herald learn discretion.

LEADER Depart; and thou, O king, touch him not. 

COPREUS I go; for 'tis feeble fighting with a single arm. But I will
come again, bringing hither a host of Argive troops, spearmen clad
in bronze; for countless warriors are awaiting my return, and king
Eurystheus in person at their head; anxiously he waits the issue here
on the borders of Alcathous' realm. And when he hears thy haughty
answer, he will burst upon thee, and thy citizens, on this land and
all that grows therein; for all in vain should we possess such hosts
of picked young troops in Argos, should we forbear to punish thee.
(COPREUS departs.)  

DEMOPHON Perdition seize thee! I am not afraid of thy Argos. Be very
sure thou shalt not drag these suppliants hence by force, to my shame;
for I hold not this city subject unto Argos, but independently.

CHORUS  (singing) 'Tis time to use our forethought, ere the host
of Argos approach our frontier, for exceeding fierce are the warriors
of Mycenae, and in the present case still more than heretofore. For
all heralds observe this custom, to exaggerate what happened twofold.
Bethink the what a tale he will tell his master of his dreadful treatment,
how he came near losing his life altogether. 

IOLAUS Children have no fairer prize than this, the being born of
a good and noble sire, and the power to wed from noble families; but
whoso is enslaved by passion and makes a lowborn match, I cannot praise
for leaving to his children a legacy of shame, to gratify himself.
For noble birth offers a stouter resistance to adversity than base
parentage; for we, in the last extremity of woe, have found friends
and kinsmen here, the only champions of these children through all
the length and breadth of this Hellenic world. Give, children, give
to them your hand, and they the same to you; draw near to them. Ah!
children, we have made trial of our friends, and if ever ye see the
path that leads you back to your native land, and possess your home
and the honours of your father, count them ever as your friends and
saviours, and never lift against their land the foeman's spear, in
memory of this, but hold this city first midst those ye love. Yea,
they well deserve your warm regard, in that they have shifted from
our shoulders to their own the enmity of so mighty a land as Argos
and its people, though they saw we were vagabonds and beggars; still
they did not give us up nor drive us forth. So while I live, and after
death,-come when it will,-loudly will I sing thy praise, good friend,
and will extol thee as I stand at Theseus' side, and cheer his heart,
as I tell how thou didst give kind welcome and protection to the sons
of Heracles, and how nobly thou dost preserve thy father's fame through
the length of Hellas, and hast not fallen from the high estate to
which thy father brought thee, a lot which few others can boast; for
'mongst the many wilt thou find one maybe, that is not degenerate
from his sire. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS This land is ever ready in an honest cause to
aid the helpless. Wherefore ere now it hath endured troubles numberless
for friends, and now in this I see a struggle nigh at hand.

DEMOPHON Thou hast spoken well, and I feel confident their conduct
will be such; our kindness will they not forget. Now will I muster
the citizens and set them in array, that I may receive Mycenae's host
with serried ranks. But first will I send scouts to meet them, lest
they fall upon me unawares; for at Argos every man is prompt to answer
to the call, and I will assemble prophets and ordain a sacrifice.
But do thou leave the altar of Zeus and go with the children into
the house; for there are those who will care for thee, even though
I be abroad. Enter then my house, old man. 

IOLAUS I will not leave the altar. Let us sit here still, praying
for the city's fair success, and when thou hast made a glorious end
of this struggle, will we go unto the house; nor are the gods who
champion us weaker than the gods of Argos, O king; Hera, wife of Zeus,
is their leader; Athena ours. And this I say is an omen of success,
that we have the stronger deity, for Pallas will not brook defeat.
(DEMOPHON and his retinue go out.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Though loud thy boasts, there be others care no more for thee for
that, O stranger from the land of Argos; nor wilt thou scare my soul
with swelling words. Not yet be this the fate of mighty Athens, beauteous
town! But thou art void of sense, and so is he, who lords it o'er
Argos, the son of Sthenelus, 

(antistrophe)

thou that comest to another state, in no wise weaker than Argos,
and, stranger that thou art, wouldst drag away by force suppliants
of the gods, wanderers that cling to my land for help, refusing to
yield to our king, nor yet having any honest plea to urge. How can
such conduct count as honourable, at least in wise men's judgment?

(epode)

I am for peace myself; yet I tell thee, wicked king, although thou
come unto my city, thou shalt not get so easily what thou expectest.
Thou art not the only man to wield a sword or targe with plates of
brass. Nay, thou eager warrior, I warn thee, bring not war's alarms
against our lovely town; restrain thyself.  (DEMOPHON re-enters.)

IOLAUS My son, why, prithee, art thou returned with that anxious
look? Hast thou news of the enemy? Are they coming, are they here,
or what thy tidings? For of a surety yon herald will not play us false.
No! sure I am their captain, prosperous heretofore, will come, with
thoughts exceeding proud against Athens. But Zeus doth punish overweening
pride. 

DEMOPHON The host of Argos is come, and Eurystheus its king; my own
eyes saw him, for the man who thinks he knows good generalship must
see the foe not by messengers alone. As yet, however, he hath not
sent his host into the plain, but, camped upon a rocky brow, is watching-I
only tell thee what I think this means-to see by which road to lead
his army hither without fighting, and how to take up a safe position
in this land. However, all my plans are by this time carefully laid;
the city is under arms, the victims stand ready to be slain to every
god, whose due this is; my seers have filled the town with sacrifices,
to turn the foe to flight and keep our country safe. All those who
chant prophetic words have I assembled, and have examined ancient
oracles, both public and secret, as means to save this city. And though
the several answers differ in many points, yet in one is the sentiment
of all clearly the same; they bid me sacrifice to Demeter's daughter
some maiden from a noble father sprung. Now I, though in your cause
I am as zealous as thou seest, yet will not slay my child, nor will
I compel any of my subjects to do so against his will; for who of
his own will doth harbour such an evil thought as to yield with his
own hands the child he loves? And now thou mayest see angry gatherings,
where some declare, 'tis right to stand by suppliant strangers, while
others charge me with folly; but if I do this deed, a civil war is
then and there at hand. Do thou then look to this and help to find
a way to save yourselves and this country without causing me to be
slandered by the citizens. For I am no despot like a barbarian monarch;
but provided do what is just, just will my treatment be.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Can it be that heaven forbids this city to help
strangers, when it hath the will and longing so to do? 

IOLAUS My children, we are even as those mariners, who have escaped
the storm's relentless rage, and have the land almost within their
reach, but after all are driven back from shore by tempests to the
deep again. Even so we, just as we reach the shore in seeming safety,
are being thrust back from this land. Ah me! Why, cruel hope, didst
thou then cheer my heart, though thou didst not mean to make the boon
complete? The king may well be pardoned, if he will not slay his subjects'
children; and with my treatment here I am content; if indeed 'tis
heaven's will, I thus should fare, still is my gratitude to thee in
no wise lost. Children, I know not what to do for you. Whither shall
we turn? for what god's altar have we left uncrowned? to what fenced
city have we failed to go? Ruin and surrender are our instant lot,
poor children! If I must die, 'tis naught to me, save that thereby
I give those foes of mine some cause for joy. But you, children, I
lament and pity, and that aged mother of your sire, Alcmena. Ah, woe
is thee for thy long span of life! and woe is me for all my idle toil!
'Twas after all our destined doom to fall into the hands of our hated
foe, and die a death of shame and misery. But lend me thine aid, thou
knowest how; for all hope of these children's safety has not yet left
me. Give me up instead of them to the Argives, O king; run no risk,
but let me save the children; to love my life becomes me not; let
it pass. Me will Eurystheus be most glad to take and treat despitefully,
as I was Heracles' companion; for the man is but a boor; wherefore
wise men ought to pray to get a wise man for their foe, and not a
proud senseless fool; for so, even if by fortune flouted, one would
meet with much consideration. 

LEADER Old man, blame not this city; for though perhaps a gain to
us, yet would it be a foul reproach that we betrayed strangers.

DEMOPHON A generous scheme is thine, but impossible. 'Tis not in
quest of the yon king comes marching hither; what would Eurystheus
gain by the death of one so old? Nay, 'tis these children's blood
he wants. For there is danger to a foe in the youthful scions of a
noble race, whose memory dwells upon their father's wrongs; all this
Eurystheus must foresee. But if thou hast any scheme besides, that
better suits the time, be ready with it, for, since I heard that oracle,
I am at a loss and full of fear.  (MACARIA enters from the temple.)

MACARIA Sirs, impute not boldness to me, because I venture forth;
this shall be my first request, for a woman's fairest crown is this,
to practise silence and discretion, and abide at home in peace. But
when I heard thy lamentations, Iolaus, I came forth, albeit I was
not appointed to take the lead in my family. Still in some sense am
I fit to do so, for these my brothers are my chiefest care, and I
fain would ask, as touching myself, whether some new trouble, added
to the former woes, is gnawing at thy heart. 

IOLAUS My daughter, 'tis nothing new that I should praise thee, as
I justly may, above all the children of Heracles. Our house seemed
to be prospering, when back it fell again into a hopeless state; for
the king declares the prophets signify that he must order the sacrifice,
not of bull or heifer, but of some tender maid of noble lineage, if
we and this city are to exist. Herein is our perplexity; the king
refuses either to sacrifice his own or any other's child. Wherefore,
though he use not terms express, yet doth he hint, that, unless we
find some way out of this perplexity, we must seek some other land,
for he this country fain would save. 

MACARIA Are these indeed the terms on which our safety depends?

IOLAUS Yea, on these; if, that is, we are successful otherwise.

MACARIA No longer then cower before the hated Argive spear; for I,
of my own free will, or ever they bid me, am ready to die and offer
myself as a victim. For what excuse have we, if, while this city deems
it right to incur great danger on our behalf, we, though we might
save ourselves, fly from death, by foisting our trouble on others?
No! indeed, 'twere surely most ridiculous to sit and mourn as suppliants
of the gods, and show ourselves but cowards, children as we are of
that illustrious sire. Where among the brave is such conduct seen?
Better, I suppose, this city should be taken and I (which Heaven forefend!)
fall into the hands of the enemy, and then, for all I am my noble
father's child, meet an awful doom, and face the Death-god none the
less. Shall I wander as an exile from this land? Shall I not feel
shame then, when someone says, as say they will, "Why are ye come
hither with suppliant boughs, loving your lives too well? Begone from
our land! for we will not succour cowards." Nay, if these be slain
and I alone be saved, I have no hope in any wise of being happy, though
many ere now have in this hope betrayed their friends, For who will
care to wed a lonely maid or make me mother of his children? 'Tis
better I should die than meet such treatment, little as I merit it.
This were fitter treatment for some other, one that is not born to
fame as I am. Conduct me to the scene of death, crown me with garlands,
and begin the rites, if so it please you; then be victorious o'er
the foe, for here I offer my life freely and without constraint, and
for my brothers and myself I undertake to die. For I, by loving not
my life too well, have found a treasure very fair, a glorious means
to leave it. 

LEADER Ah, what shall I say on hearing the maid's brave words, she
that is ready to die for her brothers? Who can speak more noble words
or do more noble deeds henceforth for ever? 

IOLAUS Daughter, thou art his own true child, no other man's but
Heracles', that godlike soul; proud am I of thy words, though I sorrow
for thy lot. Yet will I propose a fairer method: 'tis right to summon
hither all the sisters of this maiden, and then let her, on whom the
lot shall fall, die for her family; for that thou shouldst die without
the lot is not just. 

MACARIA My death shall no chance lot decide; there is no graciousness
in that; peace! old friend. But if ye accept and will avail you of
my readiness, freely do I offer my life for these, and without constraint.

IOLAUS Ah, this is even nobler than thy former word; that was matchless,
but thou dost now surpass thy bravery and noble speech. I cannot bid,
will not forbid thy dying, O my daughter! for by thy death thou dost
thy brothers serve. 

MACARIA A cautious bidding thine! Fear not to take a stain of guilt
from me, only let me die as one whose death is free. Follow me, old
friend, for in thy arms I fain would die; stand by and veil my body
with my robe, for I will go even to the dreadful doom of sacrifice,
seeing whose daughter I avow myself. 

IOLAUS I cannot stand by and see thee bleed. 

MACARIA At least do thou beg me this boon of the king, that I may
breathe out my life in women's arms instead of men's. 

DEMOPHON It shall be so, unhappy maid; for this were shame to me
to refuse the honour due, for many reasons: because thou hast a soul
so brave; because 'tis right; and thou hast shown more courage than
any of thy sex my eyes have ever seen. Now, if thou hast aught to
say to these children or thy aged guide. oh! say the last thou hast
to say-then go. 

MACARIA Farewell, old friend, farewell and prithee teach these children
to be like thyself, wise at every point; let them strive no further,
for that will suffice them. And seek to save them from death, even
as thou art anxious to do; thy children are we, thy care it was that
nurtured us. Thou seest how I yield my bridal bloom to die for them.
For you, my brothers gathered here, may you be happy! and may every
blessing be yours, for the which my blood shall pay the price! Honour
this old friend, and her that is within the house, Alcmena, the aged
mother of my sire, and these strangers too. And if ever heaven for
you devise release from trouble and a return to your home, remember
the burial due to her that saved you, funeral fair as I deserve; for
I have not failed, but stood by you, and died to save my race. This
shall be my pearl of price instead of children, and for the maiden
life I leave, if there be really aught beyond the grave-God grant
there may not be! For if, e'en there, we who are to die shall find
a life of care, I know not whither one shall turn; for death is held
a sovereign cure for every ill. 

IOLAUS Maiden of heroic soul, transcending all thy race, be sure
the fame that thou shalt win from us, in life, in death, shall leave
the rest of women far behind; farewell to thee! I dare not say harsh
words of her to whom thou art devoted, the goddess-daughter of Demeter.
(DEMOPHON leads MACARIA away.)  Children, I am undone, grief unnerves
my limbs; take hold and support me to a seat hard by, when ye have
drawn my mantle o'er my face, my sons. For I am grieved at what hath
happened, and yet, were it not fulfilled, we could not live; thus
were our fate worse, though this is grief enough. 

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Without the will of heaven none is blest, none curst, I do maintain;
nor doth the same house for ever tread the path of bliss; for one
kind of fortune follows hard upon another; one man it brings to naught
from his high estate, another though of no account it crowns with
happiness. To shun what fate decrees, is no wise permitted; none by
cunning shall thrust it from him; but he, who vainly would do so,
shall have unceasing trouble. 

(antistrophe)

Then fall not prostrate thou, but bear what heaven sends, and set
limit to thy soul's grief; for she, poor maid! in dying for her brothers
and this land, hath won a glorious death, and splendid fame shall
be her meed from all mankind; for virtue's path leads through troublous
ways. Worthy of her father, worthy of her noble birth is this she
does. And if thou dost honour the virtuous dead, I share with thee
that sentiment.  (The SERVANT OF HYLLUS enters.)  

SERVANT OF HYLLUS All hail, ye children! Where is aged Iolaus? where
the mother of your 'sire, absent from their place at this altar?

IOLAUS Here am I, so far as I can be here at all. 

SERVANT Why dost thou lie there? Why that downcast look?

IOLAUS There is come a sorrow on my house, whereby I suffer.

SERVANT Arise, lift up thy head. 

IOLAUS I am old, and all my strength is gone. 

SERVANT But I come with tidings of great joy for thee. 

IOLAUS Who art thou? Where have I met thee? I have no remembrance.

SERVANT I am a vassal of Hyllus; dost not recognize me now?

IOLAUS Best of friends, art thou come to save us twain from hurt?

SERVANT Assuredly; and moreover thou art lucky in the present case.

IOLAUS Alcmena, mother of a noble son, to thee I call! come forth,
hear this welcome news. For long has anguish caused thee inwardly
to waste, wondering if those, who now are here, would ever come.
(ALCMENA enters from the temple in answer to the call.)

ALCMENA What means that shout, that echoes throughout the house?
Hath there come yet a herald from Argos, O Iolaus, and is he treating
thee with violence? Feeble is any strength of mine; yet thus much
let me tell thee, stranger, never, whilst I live, shalt thou drag
them hence. Shouldst thou succeed, no more let me be thought the mother
of that hero. And if thou lay a finger on them, thou wilt struggle
to thy shame with two aged foes. 

IOLAUS Courage, aged dame, fear not; not from Argos is a herald come,
with hostile messages. 

ALCMENA Why then didst raise a cry, fear's harbinger? 

IOLAUS I called thee to come to me in front of this temple.

ALCMENA I know not what it means; who is this? 

IOLAUS A messenger who says thy grandson cometh hither.

ALCMENA All hail to thee for these thy tidings! But why is he not
here, where is he? if in this land he hath set foot. What hath happened
to keep him from coming hither with thee, to cheer my heart?

SERVANT He is posting the army he brought with him, and seeing it
marshalled. 

ALCMENA Then have I no concern herein. 

IOLAUS Yes, thou hast; though it is my business to inquire.

SERVANT What then wouldst thou learn of these events? 

IOLAUS About how many allies has he with him? 

SERVANT A numerous force; I cannot otherwise describe the number.

IOLAUS The leaders of the Athenians know this, I suppose?

SERVANT They do; already is their left wing set in array.

IOLAUS Is then the host already armed for battle? 

SERVANT Yea, and already are the victims brought near the ranks.

IOLAUS About what distance is the Argive host from us? 

SERVANT Near enough for their general to be plainly seen.

IOLAUS What is he about? marshalling the enemy's line? 

SERVANT So we guessed; we could not hear exactly. But I must go,
for I would not that my master should engage the foe without me, if
I can help it. 

IOLAUS I also will go with thee; for I like thee am minded, so it
seems, to be there and help my friends. 

SERVANT It least of all becomes thee thus to utter words of folly.

IOLAUS Far less to shrink from sharing with my friends the stubborn
fight. 

SERVANT Mere looks can wound no one, if the arm do naught.

IOLAUS Why, cannot I smite even through their shields? 

SERVANT Smite perhaps, more likely be smitten thyself. 

IOLAUS No foe will dare to meet me face to face. 

SERVANT Friend, the strength, that erst was thine, is thine no more.

IOLAUS Well, at any rate, I will fight with as many as ever I did.

SERVANT Small the weight thou canst throw into the balance for thy
friends, 

IOLAUS Detain me not, when I have girded myself for action.

SERVANT The power to act is thine no more, the will maybe is there.

IOLAUS Stay here I will not, say what else thou wilt. 

SERVANT How shalt thou show thyself before the troops unarmed?

IOLAUS There be captured arms within this shrine; these will I use,
and, if I live, restore; and, if I am slain, the god will not demand
them of me back. Go thou within, and from its peg take down a suit
of armour and forthwith bring it to me. To linger thus at home is
infamous, while some go fight, and others out of cowardice remain
behind.  (The SERVANT goes into the temple.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Not yet hath time laid low thy spirit, 'tis young
as ever; but thy body's strength is gone. Why toil to no purpose?
'Twill do thee hurt and benefit our city little. At thy age thou shouldst
confess thy error and let impossibilities alone. Thou canst in no
way get thy vigour back again. 

ALCMENA What means this mad resolve to leave me with my children
undefended here? 

IOLAUS Men must fight; and thou must look to them. 

ALCMENA And what if thou art slain? what safety shall I find?

IOLAUS Thy son's surviving children will care for thee.

ALCMENA Suppose they meet with some reverse? which Heaven forefend!

IOLAUS These strangers will not give thee up, fear not.

ALCMENA They are my last and only hope, I have no other.

IOLAUS Zeus too, I feel sure, cares for thy sufferings.

ALCMENA Ah! of Zeus will I never speak ill, but himself doth know
whether he is just to me.  (The SERVANT enters from the temple, carrying
the arms.)  

SERVANT Lo! here thou seest a full coat of mail; make haste to case
thyself therein; for the strife is nigh, and bitterly doth Ares loathe
loiterers; but if thou fear the weight of the armour, go now without
it, and in the ranks do on this gear; meantime will I carry it.

IOLAUS Well said! keep the harness ready to my hand, put a spear
within my grasp, and support me on the left side, guiding my steps.

SERVANT Am I to lead this warrior like a child? 

IOLAUS To save the omen, we must go without stumbling. 

SERVANT Would thy power to act were equal to thy zeal! 

IOLAUS Hasten; I shall feel it grievously, if I am too late for the
battle. 

SERVANT 'Tis thou who art slow, not I, though thou fanciest thou
art doing wonders. 

IOLAUS Dost not mark how swift my steps are hasting? 

SERVANT I mark more seeming than reality in thy haste, 

IOLAUS Thou wilt tell a different tale when thou seest me there.

SERVANT What shall I see thee do? I wish thee all success, at any
rate. 

IOLAUS Thou shalt see me smite some foeman through the shield.

SERVANT Perhaps, if ever we get there. I have my fears of that.

IOLAUS Ah! would to Heaven that thou, mine arm, e'en as I remember
thee in thy lusty youth, when with Heracles thou didst sack Sparta,
couldst so champion me to-day! how I would put Eurystheus to flight!
since he is to craven to wait the onslaught. For prosperity carries
with it this error too, a reputation for bravery; for we think the
prosperous man a master of all knowledge.  (IOLAUS and the SERVANT
depart.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

O earth, and moon that shines by night, and dazzling radiance of
the god, that giveth light to man, bear the tidings to me, shout aloud
to heaven for joy, and beside our ruler's throne, and in the shrine
of grey-eyed Athene. For my fatherland and home will I soon decide
the issue of the strife with the gleaming sword, because I have taken
suppliants under my protection. 

(antistrophe 1)

'Tis a fearful thing, that a city prosperous as Mycenae is, one famed
for martial prowess, should harbour wrath against my land; still,
my countrymen, it were a shameful thing in us to yield up suppliant
strangers at the bidding of Argos. Zeus is on my side, I am not afraid;
Zeus hath a favour unto me, as is my due; never by me shall gods be
thought weaker than mortal men. 

(strophe 2)

O dread goddess, thine the soil whereon we stand, thine this city,
for thou art its mother, queen, and saviour; wherefore turn some other
way the impious king, who leadeth a host from Argos with brandished
lance against this land; for, such my worth, I little merit exile
from my home. 

(antistrophe 2)

For thy worship is aye performed with many a sacrifice, and never
art thou forgotten as each month draweth to its close, when young
voices sing and dancers' music is heard abroad, while on our wind-swept
hill goes up the cry of joy to the beat of maidens' feet by night.
(The SERVANT enters.)  

SERVANT Mistress, the message that I bring is very short for thee
to hear and fair for me, who stand before thee, to announce. O'er
our foes we are victorious, and trophies are being set up, with panoplies
upon them, taken from thy enemies. 

ALCMENA Best of friends! this day hath wrought thy liberty by reason
of these tidings. But there still remains one anxious thought thou
dost not free me from;-a thought of fear;-are those, whose lives I
cherish, spared to me? 

SERVANT They are, and high their fame through all the army spreads.

ALCMENA The old man Iolaus,-is he yet alive? 

SERVANT Aye, that he is, a hero whom the gods delight to honour.

ALCMENA How so? Did he perform some deed of prowess? 

SERVANT He hath passed from age to youth once more. 

ALCMENA Thy tale is passing strange; but first I would that thou
shouldst tell me how our friends won the day. 

SERVANT One speech of mine puts it all clearly before thee. When
we had deployed our troops and marshalled them face to face with one
another, Hyllus dismounted from his four-horsed chariot and stood
midway betwixt the hosts. Then cried he, "Captain, who art come from
Argos, why cannot we leave this land alone? No hurt wilt thou do Mycenae,
if of one man thou rob her; come! meet me in single combat. and if
thou slay me, take the children of Heracles away with thee, but, if
thou fall, leave me to possess my ancestral honours and my home."
The host cried yes! saying the scheme he offered was a fair one, both
to rid them of their trouble and satisfy their valour. But that other,
feeling no shame before those who heard the challenge or at his own
cowardice, quailed, general though he was, to come within reach of
the stubborn spear, showing himself an abject coward; yet with such
a spirit he came to enslave the children of Heracles. Then did Hyllus
withdraw to his own ranks again, and the prophets seeing that no reconciliation
would be effected by single combat, began the sacrifice without delay
and forthwith let flow from a human throat auspicious streams of blood.
And some were mounting chariots, while others couched beneath the
shelter of their shields, and the king of the Athenians, as a highborn
chieftain should, would exhort his host-"Fellow-citizens, the land,
that feeds you and that gave you birth, demands to-day the help of
every man." Likewise Eurystheus besought his allies that they should
scorn to sully the fame of Argos and Mycenae. Anon the Etrurian trumpet
sounded loud and clear, and hand to hand they rushed; then think how
loudly clashed their ringing shields, what din arose of cries and
groans confused! At first the onset of the Argive spearmen broke our
ranks; then they in turn gave ground; next, foot to foot and man to
man, they fought their stubborn fray, many falling the while. And
either chief cheered on his men, "Sons of Athens! Ye who till the
fields of Argos! ward from your land disgrace." Do all we could, and
spite of every effort, scarce could we turn the Argive line in flight.
When lo! old Iolaus sees Hyllus starting from the ranks, whereon he
lifts his hands to him with a prayer to take him up into his chariot.
Thereon he seized the reins and went hard after the horses of Eurystheus.
From this point onward must I speak from hearsay, though hitherto
as one whose own eyes saw. For as he was crossing Pallene's hill,
sacred to the goddess Athene, he caught sight of Eurystheus' chariot,
and prayed to Hebe and to Zeus, that for one single day he might grow
young again and wreak his vengeance on his foes. Now must thou hear
a wondrous tale: two stars settled on the horses' yokes and threw
the chariot into dark shadow, which-at least so say our wiser folk-were
thy son and Hebe; and from that murky gloom appeared that aged man
in the form of a youth with strong young arms; then by the rocks of
Sciron the hero Iolaus o'ertakes Eurystheus' chariot. And he bound
his hands with gyves, and is bringing that chieftain once so prosperous
as a trophy hither, whose fortune now doth preach a lesson, clear
as day, to all the sons of men, that none should envy him, who seems
to thrive, until they see his death; for fortune's moods last but
a day. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O Zeus, who puttest my foes to flight, now may
I behold the day that frees me from cruel fear! 

ALCMENA At last, O Zeus, hast thou turned a favouring eye on my affliction;
yet do I thank thee for what has happened. And though ere this I did
not believe my son was gathered to the gods, now am I convinced thereof.
My children, now at last from toil shall ye be free, free from him,
whom hideous death awaits, Eurystheus; now shall ye behold your father's
city, and set foot in the land of your inheritance, and sacrifice
to those ancestral gods, from whom ye have been debarred and forced
to lead in strangers' lands a life of wretched vagrancy. But tell
me, what sage purpose Iolaus nursed in his heart, that he spared the
life of Eurystheus, for to my mind this is no wisdom, to catch a foe
and wreak no vengeance on him. 

SERVANT 'Twas his regard for thee, that thou might'st see him subject
to thy hand, and triumph o'er him. Rest assured, 'twas no willing
prisoner he made, but by strong constraint he bound him, for Eurystheus
was loth indeed to come alive into thy presence and pay his penalty.
Farewell, my aged mistress; I pray thee remember thy first promise
when I was beginning my story; set me free; for, at such a time as
this, sincerity becometh noble lips.  (The SERVANT departs.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Sweet is the dance to me, whenso the clear-toned flute and lovely
Aphrodite shed grace upon the feast; and a joyful thing too it is,
trow, to witness the good luck of friends, who till then ne'er dreamt
of it. For numerous is the offspring of Fate, that bringeth all to
pass, and of Time, the son of Cronus. 

(antistrophe 1)

Thine is the path of justice, O my city; this must no man wrest from
thee, thy reverence for the gods, and, whoso denieth it of thee, draws
nigh to frenzy's goal, with these plain proofs in view. Yea, for the
god proclaims it clearly, by cutting short the bad man's pride in
every case. 

(strophe 2)

In heaven, mother, lives thy son, passed from earth away; that he
went down to Hades' halls, his body burnt by the fire's fierce flame,
is past belief; in golden halls reclined he has to wife Hebe, lovely
nymph. Thou, O Hymen, hast honoured them, children both of Zeus.

(antistrophe 2)

Things for the most part form a single chain; for men say Athene
used to champion their father, and now the citizens of that goddess
have saved his children, and checked the insolence of him whose heart
preferred violence to justice. God save me from such arrogance, such
greed of soul!  (A MESSENGER enters. He is followed by guards who
bring in EURYSTHEUS bound.)  

MESSENGER Mistress, though thine eyes see him, yet will I announce
we have brought Eurystheus hither for thy pleasure, an unexpected
sight, for him no less a chance he ne'er foresaw; for little he thought
of ever falling into thy hands, what time he marched from Mycenae
with his toil-worn warriors, to sack Athens, thinking himself far
above fortune. But a power divine hath reversed our destinies, changing
their position. Now Hyllus and brave Iolaus I left raising an image
to Zeus, who routs the foe, for their triumphant victory, whilst they
bid me bring this prisoner to thee, wishing to gladden thy heart;
for 'tis the sweetest sight to see a foe fall on evil days after prosperity.

ALCMENA Art come, thou hateful wretch? Hath justice caught thee then
at last? First, turn thy head this way to me, and endure to look thy
enemies in the face, for thou art no more the ruler, but the slave.
Art thou the man-for this I fain would learn-who didst presume to
heap thy insults on my son, who now is where he is, thou miscreant?
What outrage didst thou abstain from putting upon him? Thou that didst
make him go down alive even to Hades, and wouldst send him with an
order to slay hydras and lions? Thy other evil schemes I mention not,
for to tell them were a tedious task for me. Nor did it content thee
to venture thus far only; no! but from all Hellas wouldst thou drive
me and my children, heaven's suppliants though we were, grey-beards
some of us, and some still tender babes. But here hast thou found
men and a free city, that feared not thee. Die in torment must thou,
and e'en so wilt thou gain in every way, for one death is not thy
due, after all the sorrow thou hast caused. 

MESSENGER Thou mayst not slay him. 

ALCMENA Then have we taken him captive in vain. But say, what law
forbids his death? 

MESSENGER It is not the wiff of the rulers of this land.

ALCMENA Why, what is this? Do they not approve of slaying enemies?

MESSENGER Not such as they have taken alive in battle. 

ALCMENA Did Hyllus uphold this decision? 

MESSENGER He, I suppose, ought to have disobeyed the law of the land.

ALCMENA The prisoner's life ought not to have been spared a moment.

MESSENGER It was then that he was wronged, by not being slain at
first. 

ALCMENA Why, then, he is still in time to pay his penalty.

MESSENGER There is no one who will slay him now. 

ALCMENA I will; and yet I count myself someone. 

MESSENGER Well, thou wilt incur great blame, if thou do this deed.

ALCMENA I love this city well; that cannot be gainsaid. But since
this man hath fallen into my power, no mortal hand shall wrest him
from me. Wherefore let who will, call me the woman bold, with thoughts
too high for her sex; yet shall this deed be brought to pass by me.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Lady, full well I understand thou hast a dire
quarrel with this man, and 'tis pardonable. 

EURYSTHEUS Woman, be sure I will not flatter thee nor say aught to
save my life, that can give any occasion for a charge of cowardice.
It was not of my own free will I took this quarrel up; I am aware
that I was born thy cousin, and kinsman to Heracles, thy son; but
whether I would or no, Hera, by her power divine, caused me to be
afflicted thus. Still, when undertook to be his foe, and when I knew
I had to enter on this struggle, I set myself to devise trouble in
plenty, and oft from time to time my midnight communing bore fruit,
scheming how to push aside and slay my foes, and for the future divorce
myself from fear; for I knew that son of thine was no mere cipher,
but a man indeed; yea, for, though he was my foe, I will speak well
of him, because he was a man of worth. Now, after he was taken hence,
was I not forced, by reason of these children's hatred, and because
I was conscious of an hereditary feud, to leave no stone unturned
by slaying, banishing, and plotting against them? So long as I did
so, my safety was assured. Suppose thyself hadst had my lot, wouldst
not thou have set to harassing the lion's angry whelps, instead of
letting them dwell at Argos undisturbed? Thou wilt not persuade us
otherwise. Now therefore, since they did not slay me then, when I
was prepared to die, by the laws of Hellas my death becomes a curse
on him who slays me now. The city wisely let me go, in that she regarded
the gods more than her hatred of me. Thou hast had my answer to thy
words; henceforth must I be called avenging spirit and noble hero
too. 'Tis even thus with me; to die have I no wish, but, if I leave
my life, I shall in no way be grieved. 

LEADER Alcmena, fain I would advise thee somewhat; let this man go,
for 'tis the city's will. 

ALCMENA Suppose he die, and yet I obey the city? 

LEADER That would be best of all; but how can this be? 

ALCMENA I will teach thee easily. I will slay him and then give up
his corpse to those of his friends who come for it, for, as regards
his body, I will not disobey the state; but by his death shall he
pay me the penalty. 

EURYSTHEUS Slay me, I do not ask thee for mercy; yet since this city
let me go and shrunk from slaying me, I will reward it with an old
oracle of Loxias, which in time will benefit them more than doth appear.
Bury my body after death in its destined grave in front of the shrine
of the virgin goddess at Pallene. And I will be thy friend and guardian
of thy city for ever, where I lie buried in a foreign soil, but a
bitter foe to these children's descendants, whensoe'er with gathered
host they come against this land, traitors to your kindness now; such
are the strangers ye have championed. Why then came I hither, if I
knew all this, instead of regarding the god's oracle? Because I thought,
that Hera was mightier far than any oracle, and would not betray me.
Waste no drink-offering on my tomb, nor spill the victim's blood;
for I will requite them for my treatment here with a journey they
shall rue; and ye shall have double gain from me, for I will help
you and harm them by my death. 

ALCMENA Why, why delay to kill this man, after hearing this, since
this is needed to secure the safety of your city and your children?
Himself points out the safest road. Though the man is now our foe,
yet after death is he our gain. Away with him, ye servants, and cast
him to the dogs when ye have slain him. Think not thou shalt live
to cast me forth from my native land again.  (The guards lead out
EURYSTHEUS.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) I agree. Lead on, servants. Our conduct shall
bring no stain of guilt upon our rulers. 

THEEND

----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the palace of HERACLES at Thebes. Nearby stands the altar of
Zeus, on the steps of which are now seated AMPHITRYON, MEGARA and
her sons by HERACLES. They are seeking refuge at the altar.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

AMPHITRYON What mortal hath not heard of him who shared a wife with
Zeus, Amphitryon of Argos, whom on a day Alcaeus, son of Perseus begat,
Amphitryon the father of Heracles? He it was dwelt here in Thebes,
where from the sowing of the dragon's teeth grew up a crop of earth-born
giants; for of these Ares saved a scanty band, and their children's
children people the city of Cadmus. Hence sprung Creon, son of Menoeceus,
king of this land; and Creon became the father of this lady Megara,
whom once all Cadmus' race escorted with the glad music of lutes at
her wedding, in the day that Heracles, illustrious chief, led her
to my halls. Now he, my son, left Thebes where I was settled, left
his wife Megara and her kin, eager to make his home in Argolis, in
that walled town which the Cyclopes built, whence I am exiled for
the slaying of Electryon; so he, wishing to lighten my affliction
and to find a home in his own land, did offer Eurystheus a mighty
price for my recall, even to free the world of savage monsters, whether
it was that Hera goaded him to submit to this, or that fate was leagued
against him. Divers are the toils he hath accomplished, and last of
all hath he passed through the mouth of Taenarus into the halls of
Hades to drag to the light that hound with bodies three, and thence
is he never returned. Now there is an ancient legend amongst the race
of Cadmus, that one Lycus in days gone by was husband to Dirce being
king of this city with its seven towers, before that Amphion and Zethus,
sons of Zeus, lords of the milk-white steeds, became rulers in the
land. His son, called by the same name as his father, albeit no Theban
but a stranger from Euboea, slew Creon, and after that seized the
government, having fallen on this city when weakened by dissension.
So this connection with Creon is likely to prove to us a serious evil;
for now that my son is in the bowels of the earth, this illustrious
monarch Lycus is bent on extirpating the children of Heracles, to
quench one bloody feud with another, likewise his wife and me, if
useless age like mine is to rank amongst men, that the boys may never
grow up to exact a blood-penalty of their uncle's family. So I, left
here by my son, whilst he is gone into the pitchy darkness of the
earth, to tend and guard his children in his house, am taking my place
with their mother, that the race of Heracles may not perish, here
at the altar of Zeus the Saviour, which my own gallant child set up
to commemorate his glorious victory over the Minyae. And here we are
careful to keep our station, though in need of everything, of food,
of drink, and raiment, huddled together on the hard bare ground; for
we are barred out from our house and sit here for want of any other
safety. As for friends, some I see are insincere; while others, who
are staunch, have no power to help us further. This is what misfortune
means to man; God grant it may never fall to the lot of any who bears
the least goodwill to me, to apply this never-failing test of friendship!

MEGARA Old warrior, who erst did raze the citadel of the Taphians
leading on the troops of Thebes to glory, how uncertain are God's
dealings with man! For I, as far as concerned my sire was never an
outcast of fortune, for he was once accounted a man of might by reason
of his wealth, possessed as he was of royal power, for which long
spears are launched at the lives of the fortunate through love of
it; children too he had; and me did he betroth to thy son, matching
me in glorious marriage with Heracles. Whereas now all that is dead
and gone from us; and I and thou, old friend, art doomed to die, and
these children of Heracles, whom I am guarding 'neath my wing as a
bird keepeth her tender chicks under her. And they the while in turn
keep asking me, "Mother, whither is our father gone from the land?
what is he about? when will he return?" Thus they inquire for their
father, in childish perplexity; while I put them off with excuses,
inventing stories; but still I wonder if 'tis he whenever a door creaks
on its hinges, and up they all start, thinking to embrace their father's
knees. What hope or way of salvation art thou now devising, old friend?
for to thee I look. We can never steal beyond the boundaries of the
land unseen, for there is too strict a watch set on us at every outlet,
nor have we any longer hopes of safety in our friends. Whatever thy
scheme is, declare it, lest our death be made ready, while we are
only prolonging the time, powerless to escape. 

AMPHITRYON 'Tis by no means easy, my daughter, to give one's earnest
advice on such matters easily, without weary thought. 

MEGARA Dost need a further taste of grief, or cling so fast to life?

AMPHITRYON Yes, I love this life, and cling to its hopes.

MEGARA So do I; but it boots not to expect the unexpected, old friend.

AMPHITRYON In these delays is left the only cure for our evils.

MEGARA 'Tis the pain of that interval I feel so. 

AMPHITRYON Daughter, there may yet be a happy escape from present
troubles for me and thee; my son, thy husband, may yet arrive. So
calm thyself, and wipe those tears from thy children's eyes, and soothe
them with soft words, inventing a tale to delude them, piteous though
such fraud be. Yea, for men's misfortunes ofttimes flag, and the stormy
wind doth not always blow so strong, nor are the prosperous ever so;
for all things change, making way for each other. The bravest man
is he who relieth ever on his hopes, but despair is the mark of a
coward.  (The CHORUS OF OLD MEN OF THEBES enters.)  

CHORUS  (chanting, strophe)

To the sheltering roof, to the old man's couch, leaning on my staff
have I set forth, chanting a plaintive dirge like some bird grown
grey, I that am but a voice and nothing more, a fancy bred of the
visions of sleep by night, palsied with age, yet meaning kindly. All
hail! ye orphaned babes! all hail, old friend thou too, -unhappy mother,
wailing for thy husband in the halls of Hades! 

(antistrophe)

Faint not too soon upon your way, nor let your limbs grow weary,
even as a colt beneath the yoke grows weary as he mounts some stony
hill, dragging the weight of a wheeled car. Take hold of hand or robe,
whoso feels his footsteps falter. Old friend, escort another like
thyself, who erst amid his toiling peers in the days of our youth
would take his place beside thee, no blot upon his country's glorious
record. 

See, how like their father's sternly flash these children's eyes!
Misfortune, God wot, hath not failed his children, nor yet hath his
comeliness been denied them. O Hellas! if thou lose these, of what
allies wilt thou rob thyself! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS But I see Lycus, the ruler of this land, drawing
near the house.  (Lycus and his attendants enter.)  

LYCUS One question, if I may, to this father of Heracles and his
wife; and certainly as your lord and master I have a right to put
what questions choose. How long do ye seek to prolong your lives?
What hope, what succour do ye see to save you from death? Do you trust
that these children's father, who lies dead in the halls of Hades,
will return? How unworthily ye show your sorrow at having to die,
thou  (to AMPHITRYON)  after thy idle boasts, scattered broadcast
through Hellas, that Zeus was partner in thy marriage-bed and there
begat a new god; and thou  (to MEGARA)  after calling thyself the
wife of so peerless a lord. 

After all, what was the fine exploit thy husband achieved, if he did
kil a hydra in a marsh or that monster of Nemea? which he caught in
a snare, for all he says he strangled it to death in his arms. Are
these your weapons for the hard struggle? Is it for this then that
Heracles' children should be spared? a man who has won a reputation
for valour in his contests with beasts, in all else a weakling; who
ne'er buckled shield to arm nor faced the spear, but with a bow, that
coward's weapon, was ever ready to run away. Archery is no test of
manly bravery; no! he is a man who keeps his post in the ranks and
steadily faces the swift wound the spear may plough. My policy, again,
old man, shows no reckless cruelty, but caution; for I am well aware
I slew Creon, the father of Megara, and am in possession of his throne.
So I have no wish that these children should grow up and be left to
take vengeance on me in requital for what I have done. 

AMPHITRYON As for Zeus, let Zeus defend his son's case; but as for
me, Heracles, I am only anxious on thy behalf to prove by what I say
this tyrant's ignorance; for I cannot allow thee to be ill spoken
of. First then for that which should never have been said,-for to
speak of thee Heracles as coward is, methinks, outside the pale of
speech,-of that must I clear the with heaven to witness. I appeal
then to the thunder of Zeus, and the chariot wherein he rode, when
he pierced the giants, earth's brood, to the heart with his winged
shafts, and with gods uplifted the glorious triumph-song; or go to
Pholoe and ask the insolent tribe of four-legged Centaurs, thou craven
king, ask them who they would judge their bravest foe; will they not
say my son, who according to thee is but a pretender? Wert thou to
ask Euboean Dirphys, thy native place, it would nowise sing thy praise,
for thou hast never done a single gallant deed to which thy country
can witness. Next thou dost disparage that clever invention, an archer's
weapon; come, listen to me and learn wisdom. A man who fights in line
is a slave to his weapons, and if his fellow-comrades want for courage
he is slain himself through the cowardice of his neighbours, or, if
he break his spear, he has not wherewithal to defend his body from
death, having only one means of defence; whereas all who are armed
with the trusty bow, though they have but one weapon, yet is it the
best; for a man, after discharging countless arrows, still has others
wherewith to defend himself from death, and standing at a distance
keeps off the enemy, wounding them for all their watchfulness with
shafts invisible, and never exposing himself to the foe, but keeping
under cover; and this is far the wisest course in battle, to harm
the enemy, if they are not stationed out of shot, and keep safe oneself.
These arguments are completely opposite to thine with regard to the
point at issue. Next, why art thou desirous of slaying these children?
What have they done to thee? One piece of wisdom credit thee with,
thy coward terror of a brave man's descendants. Still it is hard on
us, if for thy cowardice we must die; a fate that ought to have overtaken
thee at our braver hands, if Zeus had been fairly disposed towards
us. But, if thou art so anxious to make thyself supreme in the land,
let us at least go into exile; abstain from all violence, else thou
wilt suffer by it whenso the deity causes fortune's breeze to veer
round. 

Ah! thou land of Cadmus,-for to thee too will I turn, upbraiding thee
with words of reproach,-is this your succour of Heracles and his children?
the man who faced alone the Minyan host in battle and allowed Thebes
to see the light with freemen's eyes. I cannot praise Hellas, nor
will I ever keep silence, finding her so craven as regards my son;
she should have come with fire and sword and warrior's arms to help
these tender babes, to requite him for all his labours in purging
land and sea. Such help, my children, neither Hellas nor the city
of Thebes affords you; to me a feeble friend ye look, that am but
empty sound and nothing more. For the vigour which once I had, is
gone from me; my limbs are palsied with age, and my strength is decayed.
Were I but young and still a man of my hands, I would have seized
my spear and dabbled those flaxen locks of his with blood, so that
the coward would now be flying from my prowes beyond the bounds of
Atlas. 

LEADER Have not the brave amongst mankind a fair opening for speech,
albeit slow to begin? 

LYCUS Say what thou wilt of me in thy exalted phrase, but I by deeds
will make thee rue those words.  (Calling to his servants)  Ho! bid
wood-cutters go, some to Helicon, others to the glens of Parnassus,
and cut me logs of oak, and when they are brought to the town, pile
up a stack of wood all round the altar on either side thereof, and
set fire to it and burn them all alive, that they may learn that the
dead no longer rules this land, but that for the present I am king.
(angrily to the CHORUS)  As for you, old men, since ye thwart my
views, not for the children of Heracles alone shall ye lament but
likewise for every blow that strikes his house, and ye shall ne'er
forget ye are slaves and I your prince. 

LEADER Ye sons of Earth, whom Ares on a day did sow, when from the
dragon's ravening jaw he had torn the teeth, up with your staves,
whereon ye lean your hands, and dash out this miscreant's brains!
a fellow who, without even being a Theban, but a foreigner, lords
it shamefully o'er the younger folk; but my master shalt thou never
be to thy joy, nor shalt thou reap the harvest of all my toil; begone
with my curse upon thee! carry thy insolence back to the place whence
it came. For never whilst I live, shalt thou slay these sons of Heracles;
not so deep beneath the earth hath their father disappeared from his
children's ken. Thou art in possession of this land which thou hast
ruined, while he its benefactor has missed his just reward; and yet
do I take too much upon myself because I help those I love after their
death, when most they need a friend? Ah! right hand, how fain wouldst
thou wield the spear, but thy weakness is a death-blow to thy fond
desire; for then had I stopped thee calling me slave, and I would
have governed Thebes, wherein thou art now exulting, with credit;
for city sick with dissension and evil counsels thinketh not aright;
otherwise it would never have accepted thee as its master.

MEGARA Old sirs, I thank you; 'tis right that friends should feel
virtuous indignation on behalf of those they love; but do not on our
account vent your anger on the tyrant to your own undoing. Hear my
advice, Amphitryon, if haply there appear to thee to be aught in what
I say. I love my children; strange if I did not love those whom I
laboured to bring forth! Death I count a dreadful fate; but the man
who wrestles with necessity I esteem a fool. Since we must die, let
us do so without being burnt alive, to furnish our foes with food
for merriment, which to my mind is an evil worse than death; for many
a fair guerdon do we owe our family. Thine has ever been a warrior's
fair fame, so 'tis not to be endured that thou shouldst die a coward's
death; and my husband's reputation needs no one to witness that he
would ne'er consent to save these children's lives by letting them
incur the stain of cowardice; for the noble are afflicted by disgrace
on account of their children, nor must I shrink from following my
lord's example. As to thy hopes consider how I weigh them. Thou thinkest
thy son will return from beneath the earth: who ever has come back
from the dead out of the halls of Hades? Thou hast a hope perhaps
of softening this man by entreaty: no, no! better to fly from one's
enemy when he is so brutish, but yield to men of breeding and wisdom;
for thou wilt more easily obtain mercy there by friendly overtures.
True, a thought has already occurred to me that we might by entreaty
obtain a sentence of exile for the children; yet this too is misery,
to compass their deliverance with dire penury as the result; for 'tis
a saying that hosts look sweetly on banished friends for a day and
no more. Steel thy heart to die with us, for that awaits thee after
all. By thy brave soul I challenge thee, old friend; for whoso struggles
hard to escape destiny shows zeal no doubt, but 'tis zeal with a taint
of folly; for what must be, no one will ever avail to alter.

LEADER If a man had insulted thee, while yet my arms were lusty,
there would have been an easy way to stop him; but now am I a thing
of naught; and so thou henceforth, Amphitryon, must scheme how to
avert misfortune. 

AMPHITRYON 'Tis not cowardice or any longing for life that hinders
my dying, but my wish to save my son's children, though no doubt I
am vainly wishing for impossibilities. Lo! here is my neck ready for
thy sword to pierce, my body for thee to hack or hurl from the rock;
only one boon I crave for both of us, O king; slay me and this hapless
mother before thou slay the children, that we may not see the hideous
sight, as they gasp out their lives, calling on their mother and their
father's sire; for the rest work thy will, if so thou art inclined;
for we have no defence against death. 

MEGARA I too implore thee add a second boon, that by thy single act
thou mayst put us both under a double obligation; suffer me to deck
my children in the robes of death,-first opening the palace gates,
for now are we shut out,-that this at least they may obtain from their
father's halls. 

LYCUS I grant it, and bid my servants undo the bolts. Go in and deck
yourselves; robes I grudge not. But soon as ye have clothed yourselves,
I will return to you to consign you to the nether world.  (Lycus and
his retinue withdraw.)  

MEGARA Children, follow the footsteps of your hapless mother to your
father's halls, where others possess his substance, though his name
is still ours.  (MEGARA and her children enter the palace.)

AMPHITRYON O Zeus, in vain it seems, did I get thee to share my bride
with me; in vain used we to call thee father of my son. After all
thou art less our friend than thou didst pretend. Great god as thou
art, I, a mere mortal. surpass thee in true worth. For I did not betray
the children of Heracles; but thou by stealth didst find thy way to
my couch, taking another's wife without leave given, while to save
thy own friends thou hast no skill. Either thou art a god of little
sense, or else naturally unjust.  (AMPHITRYON follows MEGARA into
the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Phoebus is singing a plaintive dirge to drown his happier strains,
striking with key of gold his sweet-tongued lyre; so too am I fain
to sing a song of praise, a crown to all his toil, concerning him
who is gone to the gloom beneath the nether world, whether I am to
call him son of Zeus or of Amphitryon. For the praise of noble toils
accomplished is a glory to the dead. First he cleared the grove of
Zeus of a lion, and put its skin upon his back, hiding his auburn
hair in its fearful gaping jaws; 

(antistrophe 1)

Then on a day, with murderous bow he wounded the race of wild Centaurs,
that range the hills, slaying them with winged shafts; Peneus, the
river of fair eddies, knows him well, and those far fields unharvested,
and the steadings on Pelion and they who haunt the glens of Homole
bordering thereupon, whence they rode forth to conquer Thessaly, arming
themselves with pines for clubs; likewise he slew that dappled hind
with horns of gold, that preyed upon the country-folk, glorifying
Artemis, huntress queen of Oenoe; 

(strophe 2)

Next he mounted on a car and tamed with the bit the steeds of Diomede,
that greedily champed their bloody food at gory mangers with jaws
unbridled, devouring with hideous joy the flesh of men; then crossing
Hebrus' silver stream he still toiled on to perform the hests of the
tyrant of Mycenae, till he came to the strand of the Malian gulf by
the streams of Anaurus, where he slew with his arrows Cycnus, murderer
of his guests, the savage wretch who dwelt in Amphanae; 

(antistrophe 2)

Also he came to those minstrel maids, to their orchard in the west,
to pluck from the leafy apple-tree its golden fruit, when he had slain
the tawny dragon, whose awful coils were twined all round to guard
it; and he made his way into ocean's lairs, bringing calm to men that
use the oar; moreover he sought the home of Atlas, and stretched out
his hands to uphold the firmament, and on his manly shoulders took
the starry mansions of the gods; 

(strophe 3)

Then he went through the waves of heaving Euxine against the mounted
host of Amazons dwelling round Maeotis, the lake that is fed by many
a stream, having gathered to his standard all his friends from Hellas,
to fetch the gold-embroidered raiment of the warrior queen, a deadly
quest for a girdle. And Hellas won those glorious spoils of the barbarian
maid, and safe in Mycenae are they now. On Lerna's murderous hound,
the many-headed hydra, he set his branding-iron, and smeared its venom
on his darts, wherewith he slew the shepherd of Erytheia, a monster
with three bodies; 

(antistrophe 3)

And many another glorious achievement he brought to a happy issue;
to Hades' house of tears hath he now sailed, the goal of his labours,
where he is ending his career of toil, nor cometh he thence again.
Now is thy house left without a friend, and Charon's boat awaits thy
children to bear them on that journey out of life, whence is no returning,
contrary to God's law and man's justice; and it is to thy prowess
that thy house is looking although thou art not here. Had I been strong
and lusty, able to brandish the spear in battle's onset, my Theban
compeers too, I would have stood by thy children to champion them;
but now my happy youth is gone and I am left. 

But lo! I see the children of Heracles who was erst so great, clad
in the vesture of the grave, and his loving wife dragging her babes
along at her side, and that hero's aged sire. Ah! woe is me! no longer
can I stem the flood of tears that spring to my old eyes.  (MEGARA,
AMPHITRYON, and the children enter from the palace.)  

MEGARA Come now, who is to sacrifice or butcher these poor children?
or rob me of my wretched life? Behold! the victims are ready to be
led to Hades' halls. O my children! an ill-matched company are we
hurried off to die, old men and babes, and mothers, all together.
Alas! for my sad fate and my children's, whom these eyes now for the
last time behold. So I gave you birth and reared you only for our
foes to mock, to flout, and slay. Ah me! how bitterly my hopes have
disappointed me in the expectation once formed from the words of your
father.  (Addressing each of her sons in turn)  To thee thy dead sire
was for giving Argos; and thou wert to dwell in the halls of Eurystheus,
lording it o'er the fair fruitful land of Argolis; and o'er thy head
would he throw that lion's skin wherewith himself was girt. Thou wert
to be king of Thebes, famed for its chariots, receiving as thy heritage
my broad lands, for so thou didst coax thy father dear; and to thy
hand used he to resign the carved club, his sure defence, pretending
to give it thee. To thee he promised to give Oechalia, which once
his archery had wasted. Thus with three principalities would your
father exalt you his three sons, proud of your manliness; while I
was choosing the best brides for you, scheming to link you by marriage
to Athens, Thebes, and Sparta, that ye might live a happy life with
a fast sheet-anchor to hold by. And now that is all vanished; fortune's
breeze hath veered and given to you for brides the maidens of death
in their stead, and tears to me to bathe them in; woe is me for my
foolish thoughts and your grandsire here is celebrating your marriage-feast,
accepting Hades as the father of your brides, a grim relationship
to make. Ah me! which of you shall I first press to my bosom, which
last? on which bestow my kiss, or clasp close to me? Oh! would that
like the bee with russet wing, I could collect from every source my
sighs in one, and, blending them together, shed them in one copious
flood! Heracles, dear husband mine, to thee I call, if haply mortal
voice can make itself heard in Hades' halls; thy father and children
are dying and I am doomed, I who once because of thee was counted
blest as men count bliss. Come to our rescue; appear, I pray, if but
as a phantom, since thy mere coming would be enough, for they are
cowards compared with thee, who are slaying thy children.

AMPHITRYON Lady, do thou prepare the funeral rites; but I, O Zeus,
stretching out my hand to heaven, call on thee to help these children,
if such be thy intention; for soon will any aid of thine be unavailing;
and yet thou hast been oft invoked; my toil is wasted; death seems
inevitable. Ye aged friends, the joys of life are few; so take heed
that ye pass through it as gladly as ye may, without a thought of
sorrow from morn till night; for time recks little of preserving our
hopes; and, when he has busied himself on his own business, away he
flies. Look at me, a man who had made mark amongst his fellows by
deeds of note; yet hath fortune in a single day robbed me of it as
of a feather that floats away toward the sky. know not any whose plenteous
wealth and high reputation is fixed and sure; fare ye well, for now
have ye seen the last of your old friend, my comrades.  (MEGARA catches
sight of HERACLES approaching.)  MEGARA Ha! old friend, is it my own,
my dearest I behold? or what am I to say? 

AMPHITRYON I know not, my daughter; I too am struck dumb.

MEGARA Is this he who, they told us, was beneath the earth?

AMPHITRYON 'Tis he, unless some day-dream mocks our sight.

MEGARA What am I saying? What visions do these anxious eyes behold?
Old man, this is none other than thy own son. Come hither, my children,
cling to your father's robe, make haste to come, never loose your
hold, for here is one to help you, nowise behind our saviour Zeus.
(HERACLES enters.)  

HERACLES All hail! my house, and portals of my home, how glad am
I to emerge to the light and see thee. Ha! what is this? I see my
children before the house in the garb of death, with chaplets on their
heads, my wife amid a throng of men, and my father weeping o'er some
mischance. Let me draw near to them and inquire; lady, what strange
stroke of fate hath fallen on the house? 

MEGARA Dearest of all mankind to me! O ray of light appearing to
thy sire! art thou safe, and is thy coming just in time to help thy
dear ones? 

HERACLES What meanest thou? what is this confusion I find on my arrival,
father? 

MEGARA We are being ruined; forgive me, old friend, if I have anticipated
that which thou hadst a right to tell him; for woman's nature is perhaps
more prone than man's to grief, and they are my children that were
being led to death, which was my own lot too. 

HERACLES Great Apollo! what a prelude to thy story! 

MEGARA Dead are my brethren, dead my hoary sire. 

HERACLES How so? what befell him? who dealt the fatal blow?

MEGARA Lycus, our splendid monarch, slew him. 

HERACLES Did he meet him in fair fight, or was the land sick and
weak? 

MEGARA Aye, from faction; now is he master of the city of Cadmus
with its seven gates. 

HERACLES Why hath panic fallen on thee and my aged sire?

MEGARA He meant to kill thy father, me, and my children.

HERACLES Why, what had he to fear from my orphan babes?

MEGARA He was afraid they might some day avenge Creon's death.

HERACLES What means this dress they wear, suited to the dead?

MEGARA 'Tis the garb of death we have already put on. 

HERACLES And were ye being haled to death? O woe is me!

MEGARA Yes, deserted by every friend, and informed that thou wert
dead. 

HERACLES What put such desperate thoughts into your heads?

MEGARA That was what the heralds of Eurystheus kept proclaiming.

HERACLES Why did ye leave my hearth and home? 

MEGARA He forced us; thy father was dragged from his bed.

HERACLES Had he no mercy, to ill-use the old man so? 

MEGARA Mercy forsooth! that goddess and he dwell far enough apart.

HERACLES Was I so poor in friends in my absence? 

MEGARA Who are the friends of a man in misfortune? 

HERACLES Do they make so light of my hard warring with the Minyae?

MEGARA Misfortune, to repeat it to thee, has no friends.

HERACLES Cast from your heads these chaplets of death, look up to
the light, for instead of the nether gloom your eyes behold the welcome
sun. I, meantime, since here is work for my hand, will first go raze
this upstart tyrant's halls, and when I have beheaded the miscreant,
I will throw him to dogs to tear; and every Theban who I find has
played the traitor after my kindness, will I destroy with this victorious
club; the rest will I scatter with my feathered shafts and fill Ismenus
full of bloody corpses, and Dirce's clear fount shall run red with
gore. For whom ought I to help rather than wife and children and aged
sire? Farewell my labours! for it was in vain I accomplished them
rather than succoured these. And yet I ought to die in their defence,
since they for their sire were doomed; else what shall we find so
noble in having fought a hydra and a lion at the hests of Eurystheus,
if I make no effort to save my own children from death? No longer
I trow, as heretofore, shall I be called Heracles the victor.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS 'Tis only right that parents should help their
children, their aged sires, and the partners of their marriage.

AMPHITRYON My son, 'tis like thee to show thy love for thy dear ones
and thy hate for all that is hostile; only curb excessive hastiness.

HERACLES Wherein, father, am I now showing more than fitting haste?

AMPHITRYON The king hath a host of allies, needy villains though
pretending to be rich, who sowed dissension and o'erthrew the state
with a view to plundering their neighbours; for the wealth they had
in their houses was ali spent, dissipated by their sloth. Thou wast
seen entering the city; and, that being so, beware that thou bring
not thy enemies together and be slain unawares. 

HERACLES Little I reck if the whole city saw me; but chancing to
see a bird perched in an ill-omened spot, from it I learnt that some
trouble had befallen my house; so I purposely made my entry to the
land by stealth. 

AMPHITRYON For thy lucky coming hither, go salute thy household altar,
and let thy father's halls behold thy face. For soon will the king
be here in person to drag away thy wife and children and murder them,
and to add me to the bloody list. But if thou remain on the spot all
will go well, and thou wilt profit by this security; but do not rouse
thy city ere thou hast these matters well in train, my son.

HERACLES I will do so; thy advice is good; I will enter my house.
After my return at length from the sunless den of Hades and the maiden
queen of hell, I will not neglect to greet first of all the gods beneath
my roof. 

AMPHITRYON Why, didst thou in very deed go to the house of Hades,
my son? 

HERACLES Aye, and brought to the light that three-headed monster.

AMPHITRYON Didst worst him in fight, or receive him from the goddess?

HERACLES In fair fight; for I had been lucky enough to witness the
rites of the initiated. 

AMPHITRYON Is the monster really lodged in the house of Eurystheus?

HERACLES The grove of Demeter and the city of Hermione are his prison.

AMPHITRYON Does not Eurystheus know that thou hast returned to the
upper world? 

HERACLES He knows not; I came hither first to learn your news.

AMPHITRYON How is it thou wert so long beneath the earth?

HERACLES I stayed awhile attempting to bring back Theseus from Hades,
father. 

AMPHITRYON Where is he? gone to his native land? 

HERACLES He set out for Athens right glad to have escaped from the
lower world. Come, children, attend your father to the house. My entering
in is fairer in your eyes, I trow, than my going out. Take heart,
and no more let the tears stream from your eyes; thou too, dear wife,
collect thy courage, cease from fear; let go my robe; for I cannot
fly away, nor have I any wish to flee from those I love. Ah! they
do not loose their hold, but cling to my garments all the more; were
ye in such jeopardy? Well, I must lead them, taking them by the hand
to draw them after me, like a ship when towing; for I too do not reject
the care of my children; here all mankind are equal; all love their
children, both those of high estate and those; who are naught; 'tis
wealth that makes distinctions among them; some have, others want;
but all the human race loves its offspring.  (HERACLES, MEGARA, AMPHITRYON
and the children enter the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Dear to me is youth, but old age is ever hanging o'er my head, a
burden heavier than Aetna's crags, casting its pall of gloom upon
my eyes. Oh! never may the wealth of Asia's kings tempt me to barter
for houses stored with gold my happy youth, which is in wealth and
poverty alike most fair! But old age is gloomy and deathly; I hate
it; let it sink beneath the waves! Would it had never found its way
to the homes and towns of mortal men, but were still drifting on for
ever down the wind. 

(antistrophe 1)

Had the gods shown discernment and wisdom, as mortals count these
things, men would have gotten youth twice over, a visible mark of
worth amongst whomsoever found, and after death would these have retraced
their steps once more to the sun-light, while the mean man would have
had but a single portion of life; and thus would it have been possible
to distinguish the good and the bad, just as sailors know the number
of the stars amid the clouds. But, as it is, the gods have set no
certain boundary 'twixt good and bad, but time's onward roll brings
increase only to man's wealth. 

(strophe 2)

Never will I cease to link in one the Graces and the Muses, fairest
union. Never may my lines be cast among untutored boors, but ever
may I find a place among the crowned choir! Yes, still the aged bard
lifts up his voice of bygone memories; still is my song of the triumphs
of Heracles, whether Bromius the giver of wine is nigh, or the strains
of the seven-stringed lyre and the Libyan flute are rising; not yet
will I cease to sing the Muses' praise, my patrons in the dance.

(antistrophe 2)

As the maids of Delos raise their song of joy, circling round the
temple gates in honour of Leto's fair son, the graceful dancer; so
with my old lips will sing songs of victory at thy palace-doors, song
of my old age, such as sings the dying swan; for there is a goodly
theme for minstrelsy; he is the son of Zeus; yet high above his noble
birth tower his deeds of prowess, for his toil secured this life of
calm for man, having destroyed all fearsome beasts.  (AMPHITRYON comes
out of the palace as Lycus and his retinue enter.)  

LYCUS Ha! Amphitryon, 'tis high time thou camest forth from the palace;
ye have been too long arraying yourselves in the robes and trappings
of the dead. Come, bid the wife and children of Heracles show themselves
outside the house, to die on the conditions you yourselves offered.

AMPHITRYON O king, thou dost persecute me in my misery and heapest
insult upon me over and above the loss of my son; thou shouldst have
been more moderate in thy zeal, though thou art my lord and master.
But since thou dost impose death's stern necessity on me, needs must
I acquiesce and do thy will. 

LYCUS Pray, where is Megara? where are the children of Alcmena's
son? 

AMPHITRYON She, I believe, so far as I can guess from outside-

LYCUS What grounds hast thou to base thy fancy on? 

AMPHITRYON Is sitting as a suppliant on the altar's hallowed steps.

LYCUS Imploring them quite uselessly to save her life. 

AMPHITRYON And calling on her dead husband, quite in vain.

LYCUS He is nowhere near, and he certainly will never come.

AMPHITRYON No, unless perhaps a god should raise him from the dead.

LYCUS Go to her and bring her from the palace. 

AMPHITRYON By doing so I should become an accomplice in her murder.

LYCUS Since thou hast this scruple, I, who have left fear behind,
will myself bring out the mother and her children. Follow me, servants,
that we may put an end to this delay of our work to our joy.  (Lycus
and his servants enter the palace.)  

AMPHITRYON Then go thy way along the path of fate; for what remains,
maybe another will provide. Expect for thy evil deeds to find some
ill thyself. Ah! my aged friends, he is marching fairly to his doom;
soon will he be entangled in the snare of the sword, thinking to slay
his neighbours, the villain! I will hence, to see him fall dead; for
the sight of a foe being slain and paying the penalty of his misdeeds
gives pleasure.  (AMPHITRYON follows Lycus into the palace.)

CHORUS  (singing) Evil has changed sides; he who was erst a mighty
king is now turning his life backward into the road to Hades.

Hail to thee! justice and heavenly retribution. 
At last hast thou reached the goal where thy death will pay the forfeit,

For thy insults against thy betters. 
Joy makes my tears burst forth. 
There is come a retribution, which the prince of the land never once
thought in his heart would happen. 

Come, old friends, let us look within to see if one we know has met
the fate I hope. 

LYCUS  (within) Ah me! ah me! 

CHORUS  (singing) Ha! how sweet to hear that opening note of his
within the house; death is not far off him now. 

Hark! the prince cries out in his agony; that preludes death.

LYCUS  (within) O kingdom of Cadmus, by treachery I am perishing!

CHORUS  (singing) Thou wert thyself for making others perish; endure
thy retribution; 'tis only the penalty of thy own deeds thou art paying.

Who was he, weak son of man, that aimed his silly saying at the blessed
gods of heaven with impious blasphemy, maintaining that they are weaklings
after all? 

Old friends, our godless foe is now no more. 
The house is still; let us to our dancing. 
Yea, for fortune smiles upon my friends as I desire. 

(strophe 1)

Dances and banquets now prevail throughout the holy town of Thebes.
For release from tears and respite from sorrow give birth to song.
The upstart king is dead and gone; our former monarch now is prince,
having made his way even from the bourn of Acheron. Hope beyond all
expectation is fulfilled. 

(antistrophe 1)

To heed the right and wrong is heaven's care. 'Tis their gold and
their good luck that lead men's hearts astray, bringing in their train
unholy tyranny. For no man ever had the courage to reflect what reverses
time might bring; but, disregarding law to gratify lawlessness, he
shatters in gloom the car of happiness. 

(strophe 2)

Deck thee with garlands, O Ismenus! break forth into dancing, ye
paved streets of our seven-gated city! come Dirce, fount of waters
fair; and joined with her ye daughters of Asopus, come from your father's
waves to add your maiden voices to our hymn, the victor's prize that
Heracles hath won. O Pythian rock, with forests crowned, and haunts
of the Muses on Helicon! make my city and her walls re-echo with cries
of joy; where sprang the earth-born crop to view, a warrior-host with
shields of brass, who are handing on their realm to children's children,
a light divine to Thebes. 

(antistrophe 2)

All hail the marriage! wherein two bridegrooms shared; the one, a
mortal; the other, Zeus, who came to wed the maiden sprung from Perseus;
for that marriage of thine, O Zeus, in days gone by has been proved
to me a true story beyond all expectation; and time hath shown the
lustre of Heracles' prowess, who emerged from caverns 'neath the earth
after leaving Pluto's halls below. To me art thou a worthier lord
than that base-born king, who now lets it be plainly seen in this
struggle 'twixt armed warriors, whether justice still finds favour
in heaven.  (The spectres of MADNESS and IRIS appear from above. The
CHORUS sees them.)  Ha! see there, my old comrades! is the same wild
panic fallen on us all; what phantom is this I see hovering o'er the
house? Fly, fly, bestir thy tardy steps! begone! away! away! O saviour
prince, avert calamity from me! 

IRIS Courage, old men! she, whom you see, is Madness, daughter of
Night, and I am Iris, the handmaid of the gods. We have not come to
do your city any hurt, but against the house of one man only is our
warfare, even against him whom they call the son of Zeus and Alcmena.
For until he had finished all his grievous toils, Destiny was preserving
him, nor would father Zeus ever suffer me or Hera to harm him. But
now that he hath accomplished the labours of Eurystheus, Hera is minded
to brand him with the guilt of shedding kindred blood by slaying his
own children, and I am one with her. Come then, maid unwed, child
of murky Night, harden thy heart relentlessly, send forth frenzy upon
him, confound his mind even to the slaying of his children, drive
him, goad him wildly on his mad career, shake out the sails of death,
that when he has sent o'er Acheron's ferry that fair group of children
by his own murderous hand, he may learn to know how fiercely against
him the wrath of Hera burns and may also experience mine; otherwise,
if he escape punishment, the gods will become as naught, while man's
power will grow. 

MADNESS Of noble parents was I born, the daughter of Night, sprung
from the blood of Uranus; and these prerogatives I hold, not to use
them in anger against friends, nor have I any joy in visiting the
homes of men; and fain would I counsel Hera, before I see her err,
and thee too, if ye will hearken to my words. This man, against whose
house thou art sending me, has made himself a name alike in heaven
and earth; for, after taming pathless wilds and raging sea, he by
his single might raised up again the honours of the gods when sinking
before man's impiety; wherefore I counsel thee, do not wish him dire
mishaps. 

IRIS Spare us thy advice on Hera's and my schemes. 

MADNESS I seek to turn thy steps into the best path instead of into
this one of evil. 

IRIS 'Twas not to practice self-control that the wife of Zeus sent
thee hither. 

MADNESS I call the sun-god to witness that herein I am acting against
my will; but if indeed I must forthwith serve thee and Hera and follow
you in full cry as hounds follow the huntsman, why go I will; nor
shall ocean with its moaning waves, nor the earthquake, nor the thunderbolt
with blast of agony be half so furious as the headlong rush I will
make into the breast of Heracles; through his roof will I burst my
way and swoop upon his house, after first slaying his children; nor
shall their murderer know that he is killing his own-begotten babes,
till he is released from my madness. Behold him! see how even now
he is wildly tossing his head at the outset, and rolling his eyes
fiercely from side to side without word; nor can he control his panting
breath; but like a bull in act to charge, he bellows fearfully, calling
on the goddesses of nether hell. Soon will I rouse thee to yet wilder
dancing and sound a note of terror in thine ear. Soar away, O Iris,
to Olympus on thy honoured course; while I unseen will steal into
the halls of Heracles.  (IRIS and MADNESS vanish.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) Alas! alas! lament, O city; the son of Zeus, thy
fairest bloom, is being cut down. 

Woe is thee, Hellas! that wilt cast from thee thy benefactor, and
destroy him as he madly, wildly dances where no pipe is heard.

She is mounted on her car, the queen of sorrow and sighing, and is
goading on her steeds, as if for outrage, the Gorgon child of Night,
with hundred hissing serpent-heads, Madness of the flashing eyes.

Soon hath the god changed his good fortune; soon will his children
breathe their last, slain by a father's hand. 

Ah me! alas! soon will vengeance, mad, relentless, lay low by cruel
death thy unhappy son, O Zeus, exacting a full penalty. 

Alas, O house! the fiend begins her dance of death without the cymbal's
crash, with no glad waving of the wine-god's staff. 

Woe to these halls toward bloodshed she moves, and not to pour libations
of the juice of the grape. 

O children, haste to fly; that is the chant of death her piping plays.

Ah, yes! he is chasing the children. Never, ah! never will Madness
lead her revel rout in vain. 

Ah misery! 
Ah me! how I lament that aged sire, that mother too that bore his
babes in vain. 

Look! look! 
A tempest rocks the house; the roof is falling with it. 
Oh! what art thou doing, son of Zeus? 
Thou art sending hell's confusion against thy house, as erst did Pallas
on Enceladus.  (A MESSENGER enters from the palace.)  

MESSENGER Ye hoary men of eld! 

CHORUS Why, oh! why this loud address to me? 

MESSENGER Awful is the sight within! 

CHORUS No need for me to call another to announce that.

MESSENGER Dead lie the children. 

CHORUS Alas! 

MESSENGER Ah weep! for here is cause for weeping. 

CHORUS A cruel murder, wrought by parents' hands! 

MESSENGER No words can utter more than we have suffered.

CHORUS What, canst thou prove this piteous ruin was a father's outrage
on his children? Tell me how these heaven-sent woes came rushing on
the house; say how the children met their sad mischance.

MESSENGER Victims to purify the house were stationed before the altar
of Zeus, for Heracles had slain and cast from his halls the king of
the land. There stood his group of lovely children, with his sire
and Megara; and already the basket was being passed round the altar,
and we were keeping holy silence. But just as Alcmena's son was bringing
the torch in his right hand to dip it in the holy water, he stopped
without a word. And as their father lingered, his children looked
at him; and lo! he was changed; his eyes were rolling; he was distraught;
his eyeballs were bloodshot and starting from their sockets, and foam
was oozing down his bearded cheek. Anon he spoke, laughing the while
a madman's laugh, "Father, why should I sacrifice before I have slain
Eurystheus, why kindle the purifying flame and have the toil twice
over, when I might at one stroke so fairly end it all? Soon as I have
brought the head of Eurystheus hither, I will cleanse my hands for
those already slain. Spill the water, cast the baskets from your hands.
Ho! give me now my bow and club! To famed Mycenae will I go; crow-bars
and pick-axes must I take, for I will heave from their very base with
iron levers those city-walls which the Cyclopes squared with red plumb-line
and mason's tools." 

Then he set out, and though he had no chariot there, he thought he
had, and was for mounting to its seat, and using a goad as though
his fingers really held one. A twofold feeling filled his servants'
breasts, half amusement, and half fear; and one looking to his neighbour
said, "Is our master making sport for us, or is he mad?" But he the
while was pacing to and fro in his house; and, rushing into the men's
chamber, he thought he had reached the city of Nisus, albeit he had
gone into his own halls. So he threw himself upon the floor, as if
he were there, and made ready to feast. But after waiting a brief
space he began saying he was on his way to the plains amid the valleys
of the Isthmus; and then stripping himself of his mantle, he fell
to competing with an imaginary rival, o'er whom he proclaimed himself
victor with his own voice, calling on imaginary spectators to listen.
Next, fancy carrying him to Mycenae, he was uttering fearful threats
against Eurystheus. Meantime his father caught him by his stalwart
arm, and thus addressed him, "My son, what meanest thou hereby? What
strange doings are these? Can it be that the blood of thy late victims
has driven thee frantic?" But he, supposing it was the father of Eurystheus
striving in abject supplication to touch his hand, thrust him aside,
and then against his own children aimed his bow and made ready his
quiver, thinking to slay the sons of Eurystheus. And they in wild
affright darted hither and thither, one to his hapless mother's skirts,
another to the shadow of a pillar, while a third cowered 'neath the
altar like a bird. Then cried their mother, "O father, what art thou
doing? dost mean to slay thy children?" Likewise his aged sire and
all the gathered servants cried aloud. But he, hunting the child round
and round, the column, in dreadful circles, and coming face to face
with him shot him to the heart; and he fell upon his back, sprinkling
the stone pillars with blood as he gasped out his life. Then did Heracles
shout for joy and boasted loud, "Here lies one of Eurystheus' brood
dead at my feet, atoning for his father's hate." Against a second
did he aim his bow, who had crouched at the altar's foot thinking
to escape unseen. But ere he fired, the poor child threw himself at
his father's knees, and, flinging his hand to reach his beard or neck,
cried, "Oh! slay me not, dear father mine! I am thy child, thine own;
'tis no son of Eurystheus thou wilt slay." 

But that other, with savage Gorgon-scowl, as the child now stood in
range of his baleful archery, smote him on the head, as smites a smith
his molten iron, bringing down his club upon the fair-haired boy,
and crushed the bones. The second caught, away he hies to add a third
victim to the other twain. But ere he could, the poor mother caught
up her babe and carried him within the house and shut the doors; forthwith
the madman, as though he really were at the Cyclopean walls, prizes
open the doors with levers, and, hurling down their posts, with one
fell shaft laid low his wife and child. Then in wild career he starts
to slay his aged sire; but lo! there came a phantom,-so it seemed
to us on-lookers,-Of Pallas, with plumed helm, brandishing a spear;
and she hurled a rock against the breast of Heracles, which stayed
him from his frenzied thirst for blood and plunged him into sleep;
to the ground he fell, smiting his back against a column that had
fallen on the floor in twain when the roof fell in. Thereon we rallied
from our flight, and with the old man's aid bound him fast with knotted
cords to the pillar, that on his awakening he might do no further
evil. So there he sleeps, poor wretch! a sleep that is not blest,
having murdered wife and children; nay, for my part know not any son
of man more miserable than he.  (The MESSENGER withdraws.)

CHORUS  (singing) That murder wrought by the daughters of Danaus,
whereof my native Argos wots, was formerly the most famous and notorious
in Hellas; but this hath surpassed and outdone those previous horrors.
I could tell of the murder of that poor son of Zeus, whom Procne,
mother of an only child, slew and offered to the Muses; but thou hadst
three children, wretched parent, and all of them hast thou in thy
frenzy slain. What groans or wails, what funeral dirge, or chant of
death am I to raise? Alas and woe! see, the bolted doors of the lofty
palace are being rolled apart. Ah me! behold these children lying
dead before their wretched father, who is sunk in awful slumber after
shedding their blood. Round him are bonds and cords, made fast with
many a knot about the body of Heracles, and lashed to the stone columns
of his house. While he, the aged sire, like mother-bird wailing her
unfledged brood, comes hasting hither with halting steps on his bitter
journey.  (The central doors of the palace have opened and have disclosed
HERACLES lying asleep, bound to a shattered column. AMPHITRYON steps
out. The following lines between AMPHITRYON and the CHORUS are chanted
responsively.)  

AMPHITRYON Softly, softly! ye aged sons of Thebes, let him sleep
on and forget his sorrows. 

CHORUS For thee, old friend, I weep and mourn, for the children too
and that victorious chief. 

AMPHITRYON Stand further off, make no noise nor outcry, rouse him
not from his calm deep slumber. 

CHORUS O horrible! all this blood- 

AMPHITRYON Hush, hush! ye will be my ruin. 

CHORUS That he has spilt is rising up against him. 

AMPHITRYON Gently raise your dirge of woe, old friends; lest he wake,
and, bursting his bonds, destroy the city, rend his sire, and dash
his house to pieces. 

CHORUS I cannot, cannot- 

AMPHITRYON Hush! let me note his breathing; come, let me put my ear
close. 

CHORUS Is he sleeping? 

AMPHITRYON Aye, that is he, a deathly sleep, having slain wife and
children with the arrows of his twanging bow. 

CHORUS Ah! mourn- 

AMPHITRYON I do. 

CHORUS The children's death; 

AMPHITRYON Ah me! 

CHORUS And thy own son's doom. 

AMPHITRYON Ah misery! 

CHORUS Old friend- 

AMPHITRYON Hush! hush! he is turning, he is waking! Oh Oh! let me
hide myself beneath the covert of yon roof. 

CHORUS Courage! darkness still broods o'er thy son's eye.

AMPHITRYON Oh! beware; 'tis not that I shrink from leaving the light
after my miseries, poor wretch! but should he slay me that am his
father, then will he be devising woe on woe, and to the avenging curse
will add a parent's blood. 

CHORUS Well for thee hadst thou died in that day, when, to win thy
wife, thou didst go forth to exact vengeance for her slain brethren
by sacking the Taphians' sea-beat town. 

AMPHITRYON Fly, fly, my aged friends, haste from before the palace,
escape his waking fury! For soon will he heap up fresh carnage on
the old, ranging wildly once more through the streets of Thebes.

CHORUS O Zeus, why hast thou shown such savage hate against thine
own son and plunged him in this sea of troubles? 

HERACLES  (waking) Aha! my breath returns; I am alive; and my eyes
see, opening on the sky and earth and yon sun's darting beam; but
how my senses reel! in what strange turmoil am I plunged! my fevered
breath in quick spasmodic gasps escapes my lungs. How now? why am
I lying here, made fast with cables like a ship, my brawny chest and
arms tied to a shattered piece of masonry, with corpses for my neighbours;
while o'er the floor my bow and arrows are scattered, that erst like
trusty squires to my arm both kept me safe and were kept safe of me?
Surely I am not come a second time to Hades' halls, having just returned
from thence for Eurystheus? No, I do not see Sisyphus with his stone,
or Pluto, or his queen, Demeter's child. Surely I am distraught; I
cannot remember where I am. Ho, there! which of my friends is near
or far to help me in my ignorance? For I have no clear knowledge of
things once familiar. 

AMPHITRYON My aged friends, shall I approach the scene of my sorrow?

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Yes, and let me go with thee, nor desert thee
in thy trouble. 

HERACLES Father, why dost thou weep and veil thy eyes, standing aloof
from thy beloved son? 

AMPHITRYON My child! mine still, for all thy misery. 

HERACLES Why, what is there so sad in my case that thou dost weep?

AMPHITRYON That which might make any of the gods weep, were he to
suffer so. 

HERACLES A bold assertion that, but thou art not yet explaining what
has happened. 

AMPHITRYON Thine own eyes see that, if by this time thou are restored
to thy senses. 

HERACLES Fill in thy sketch if any change awaits my life.

AMPHITRYON I will explain, if thou art no longer mad as a fiend of
hell. 

HERACLES God help us! what suspicions these dark hints of thine again
excite! 

AMPHITRYON I am still doubtful whether thou art in thy sober senses.

HERACLES I never remember being mad. 

AMPHITRYON Am I to loose my son, old friends, or what? 

HERACLES Loose and say who bound me; for I feel shame at this.

AMPHITRYON Rest content with what thou knowest of thy woes; the rest
forego. 

HERACLES Enough! I have no wish to probe thy silence. 

AMPHITRYON O Zeus, dost thou behold these deeds proceeding from the
throne of Hera? 

HERACLES What! have I suffered something from her enmity?

AMPHITRYON A truce to the goddess! attend to thy own troubles.

HERACLES I am undone; what mischance wilt thou unfold? 

AMPHITRYON See here the corpses of thy children. 

HERACLES O horror! what hideous sight is here? ah me! 

AMPHITRYON My son, against thy children hast thou waged unnatural
war. 

HERACLES War! what meanst thou? who killed these? 

AMPHITRYON Thou and thy bow and some god, whoso he be that is to
blame. 

HERACLES What sayst thou? what have I done? Speak, father, thou messenger
of evil. 

AMPHITRYON Thou wert distraught; 'tis a sad explanation thou art
asking. 

HERACLES Was it I that slew my wife also? 

AMPHITRYON Thy own unaided arm hath done all this. 

HERACLES Ah, woe is me! a cloud of sorrow wraps me round.

AMPHITRYON The reason this that I lament thy fate. 

HERACLES Did I dash my house to pieces or incite others thereto?

AMPHITRYON Naught know I save this, that thou art utterly undone.

HERACLES Where did my frenzy seize me? where did it destroy me?

AMPHITRYON In the moment thou wert purifying thyself witb fire at
the altar. 

HERACLES Ah me! why do I spare my own life when I have taken that
of my dear children? Shall I not hasten to leap from some sheer rock,
or aim the sword against my heart and avenge my children's blood,
or burn my body in the fire and so avert from my life the infamy which
now awaits me? 

But hither I see Theseus coming to check my deadly counsels, my kinsman
and friend. Now shall I stand revealed, and the dearest of my friends
will see the pollution I have incurred by my children's murder. Ah,
woe is me! what am I to do? Where can I find release from my sorrows?
shall I take wings or plunge beneath the earth? Come, let me veil
my head in darkness; for I am ashamed of the evil I have done, and,
since for these I have incurred fresh blood-guiltiness, I would fain
not harm the innocent.  (THESEUS and his retinue enter.)

THESEUS I am come, and others with me, young warriors from the land
of Athens, encamped by the streams of Asopus, to help thy son, old
friend. For a rumour reached the city of the Erechtheidae, that Lycus
had usurped the sceptre of this land and was become your enemy even
to battle. Wherefore I came making recompense for the former kindness
of Heracles in saving me from the world below, if haply ye have any
need of such aid as I or my allies can give, old prince.

Ha! what means this heap of dead upon the floor? Surely I have not
delayed too long and come too late to check new ills? Who slew these
children? whose wife is this I see? Boys do not go to battle; nay,
it must be some other strange mischance I here discover.  (The following
lines between THESEUS and AMPHITRYON are chanted responsively.)

AMPHITRYON O king, whose home is that olive-clad hill! 

THESEUS Why this piteous prelude in addressing me? 

AMPHITRYON Heaven has afflicted us with grievous suffering.

THESEUS Whose be these children, o'er whom thou weepest?

AMPHITRYON My own son's children, woe to him! their father and butcher
both was he, hardening his heart to the bloody deed. 

THESEUS Hush good words only! 

AMPHITRYON I would I could obey! 

THESEUS What dreadful words! 

AMPHITRYON Fortune has spread her wings, and we are ruined, ruined.

THESEUS What meanest thou? what hath he done? 

AMPHITRYON Slain them in a wild fit of frenzy with arrows dipped
in the venom of the hundred-headed hydra. 

THESEUS This is Hera's work; but who lies there among the dead, old
man? 

AMPHITRYON My son, my own enduring son, that marched with gods to
Phlegra's plain, there to battle with giants and slay them, warrior
that he was. 

THESEUS Ah, woe for him! whose fortune was e'er so curst as his?

AMPHITRYON Never wilt thou find another that hath borne a larger
share of suffering or been more fatally deceived. 

THESEUS Why doth he veil his head, poor wretch, in his robe?

AMPHITRYON He is ashamed to meet thine eye; his kinsman's kind intent
and his children's blood make him abashed. 

THESEUS But I come to sympathize; uncover him. 

AMPHITRYON My son, remove that mantle from thine eyes, throw it from
thee, show thy fare unto the sun; a counterpoise to weeping is battling
for the mastery. In suppliant wise I entreat thee, as I grasp thy
beard, thy knees, thy hands, and let fall the tear from my old eyes.
O my child! restrain thy savage lion-like temper, for thou art rushing
forth on an unholy course of bloodshed, eager to join woe to woe.

THESEUS Ho! To thee I call who art huddled there in thy misery, show
to they friends thy face; for no darkness is black enough to hide
thy sad mischance. Why dost thou wave thy hand at me, signifying murder?
is it that I may not be polluted by speaking with thee? If I share
thy misfortune, what is that to me? For if I too had luck in days
gone by, must refer it to the time when thou didst bring me safe from
the dead to the light of life. I hate a friend whose gratitude grows
old; one who ready to enjoy his friends' prosperity but unwilling
to sail in the same ship with them when their fortune lours. Arise,
unveil thy head, poor wretch! and look on me. The gallant soul endures
without a word such blows as heaven deals. 

HERACLES O Theseus, didst thou witness this struggle with my children?

THESEUS I heard of it, and now I see the horrors thou meanest.

HERACLES Why then hast thou unveiled my head to the sun?

THESEUS Why have I? Thou, a man, canst not pollute what is of God.

HERACLES Fly, luckless wretch, from my unholy taint. 

THESEUS The avenging fiend goes not forth from friend to friend.

HERACLES For this I thank thee; I do not regret the service I did
thee. 

THESEUS While I, for kindness then received, now show my pity for
thee. 

HERACLES Ah yes! I am piteous, a murderer of my sons. 

THESEUS I weep for thee in thy changed fortunes. 

HERACLES Didst ever find another more afflicted? 

THESEUS Thy misfortunes reach from earth to heaven. 

HERACLES Therefore am I resolved on death. 

THESEUS Dost thou suppose the gods attend to these thy threats?

HERACLES Remorseless hath heaven been to me; so I will prove the
like to it. 

THESEUS Hush! lest thy presumption add to thy sufferings.

HERACLES My barque is freighted full with sorrow; there is no room
to stow aught further. 

THESEUS What wilt thou do? whither is thy fury drifting thee?

HERACLES I will die and return to that world below whence I have
just come. 

THESEUS Such language is fit for any common fellow. 

HERACLES Ah! thine is the advice of one outside sorrow's pale.

THESEUS Are these indeed the words of Heracles, the much-enduring?

HERACLES Though never so much as this. Endurance must have a limit.

THESEUS Is this man's benefactor, his chiefest friend? 

HERACLES Man brings no help to me; no! Hera has her way.

THESEUS Never will Hellas suffer thee to die through sheer perversity.

HERACLES Hear me a moment, that I may enter the lists with words
in answer to thy admonitions; and I will unfold to thee why life now
as well as formerly has been unbearable to me. First I am the son
of a man who incurred the guilt of blood, before he married my mother
Alcmena, by slaying her aged sire. Now when the foundation is badly
laid at birth, needs must the race be cursed with woe; and Zeus, whoever
this Zeus may be, begot me as a butt for Hera's hate; yet be not thou
vexed thereat, old man; for thee rather than Zeus do I regard as my
father. Then whilst I was yet being suckled, that bride of Zeus did
foist into my cradle fearsome snakes to compass my death. After I
was grown to man's estate, of all the toils I then endured what need
to tell? of all the lions, Typhons triple-bodied, and giants that
I slew; or of the battle I won against the hosts of four-legged Centaurs?
or how when I had killed the hydra, that monster with a ring of heads
with power to grow again, I passed through countless other toils besides
and came unto the dead to fetch to the light at the bidding of Eurystheus
the three-headed hound, hell's porter. Last, ah, woe is me have I
perpetrated this bloody deed to crown the sorrows of my house with
my children's murder. To this sore strait am I come; no longer may
I dwell in Thebes, the city that I love; for suppose I stay, to what
temple or gathering of friends shall I repair? For mine is no curse
that invites address. Shall I to Argos? how can I, when I am an exile
from my country? Well, is there a single other city I can fly to?
And if there were, am I to be looked at askance as a marked man, branded
by cruel stabbing tongues, "Is not this the son of Zeus that once
murdered wife and children? Plague take him from the land!"

Now to one who was erst called happy, such changes are a grievous
thing; though he who is always unfortunate feels no such pain, for
sorrow is his birthright. This, methinks, is the piteous pass I shall
one day come to; for earth will cry out forbidding me to touch her,
the sea and the river-springs will refuse me a crossing, and I shall
become like Ixion who revolves in chains upon that wheel. Wherefore
this is best, that henceforth I be seen by none of the Hellenes, amongst
whom in happier days I lived in bliss. What right have I to live?
what profit can I have in the possession of a useless, impious life?
So let that noble wife of Zeus break forth in dancing, beating with
buskined foot on heaven's bright floor; for now hath she worked her
heart's desire in utterly confounding the chiefest of Hellas' sons.
Who would pray to such a goddess? Her jealousy of Zeus for his love
of a woman hath destroyed the benefactors of Hellas, guiltless though
they were. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS This is the work of none other of the gods than
the wife of Zeus; thou art right in that surmise. 

THESEUS I cannot counsel you to die rather than to go on suffering.
There is not a man alive that hath wholly 'scaped misfortune's taint,
nor any god either, if what poets sing is true. Have they not intermarried
in ways that law forbids? Have they not thrown fathers into ignominious
chains to gain the sovereign power? Still they inhabit Olympus and
brave the issue of their crimes. And yet what shalt thou say in thy
defence, if thou, child of man, dost kick against the pricks of fate,
while they do not? Nay, then, leave Thebes in compliance with the
law, and come with me to the city of Pallas. There, when I have purified
thee of thy pollution, will I give thee temples and the half of all
I have. Yea, I will give thee all those presents I received from the
citizens for saving their children, seven sons and daughters seven,
on the day I slew the bull of Crete; for I have plots of land assigned
me throughout the country; these shall henceforth be called after
thee by men, whilst thou livest; and at thy death, when thou art gone
to Hades' halls, the city of Athens shall unite in exalting thy honour
with sacrifices and a monument of stone. For 'tis a noble crown for
citizens to win from Hellas, even a reputation fair, by helping a
man of worth. This is the return that I will make thee for saving
me, for now art thou in need of friends. But when heaven delights
to honour a man, he has no need of friends; for the god's aid, when
he chooses to give it, is enough. 

HERACLES Alas! this is quite beside the question of my troubles.
For my part, I do not believe that the gods indulge in unholy unions;
and as for putting fetters on parents' hands, I have never thought
that worthy of belief, nor will I now be so persuaded, nor again that
one god is naturally lord and master of another. For the deity, if
he be really such, has no wants; these are miserable fictions of the
poets. But I, for all my piteous plight, reflected whether I should
let myself be branded as a coward for giving up my life. For whoso
schooleth not his frail mortal nature to bear fate's buffets as he
ought, will never be able to withstand even a man's weapon. I will
harden my heart against death and seek thy city, with grateful thanks
for all thou offerest me.  (He weeps.)  Of countless troubles have
I tasted, God knows, but never yet did faint at any or shed a single
tear; nay, nor ever dreamt that I should come to this, to let the
tear-drop fall. But now, it seems, I must be fortune's slave. Well,
let it pass; old father mine, thou seest me go forth to exile, and
in me beholdest my own children's murderer. Give them burial and lay
them out in death with the tribute of a tear, for the law forbids
my doing so. Rest their heads upon their mother's bosom and fold them
in her arms, sad pledges of our union, whom I, alas! unwittingly did
slay. And when thou hast buried these dead, live on here still, in
bitternes maybe, but still constrain thy soul to share my sorrows.
O children! he who begat you, your own father, hath been your destroyer,
and ye have had no profit of my triumphs, all my restless toil to
win you a fair name in life, a glorious guerdon from a sire. Thee
too, unhappy wife, this hand hath slain, a poor return to make thee
for preserving mine honour so safe, for all the weary watch thou long
hast kept within my house. Alas for you, my wife, my sons! and woe
for me, how sad my lot, cut off from wife and child! Ah! these kisses,
bitter-sweet! these weapons which 'tis pain to own! I am not sure
whether to keep or let them go; dangling at my side they thus will
say, "With us didst thou destroy children and wife; we are thy children's
slayers, and thou keepest us." Shall I carry them after that? what
answer can I make? Yet, am I to strip me of these weapons, the comrades
of my glorious career in Hellas, and put myself thereby in the power
of my foes, to die a death of shame? No! I must not let them go, but
keep them, though it grieve me. In one thing, Theseus, help my misery;
come to Argos with me and aid in settling my reward for bringing Cerberus
thither; lest, if I go all alone, my sorrow for my sons do me some
hurt. 

O land of Cadmus, and all ye folk of Thebes! cut off your hair, and
mourn with me; go to my children's burial, and with united dirge lament
alike the dead and me; for on all of us hath Hera inflicted the same
cruel blow of destruction. 

THESEUS Rise, unhappy man! thou hast had thy fill of tears.

HERACLES I cannot rise; my limbs are rooted here. 

THESEUS Yea, even the strong are o'erthrown by misfortunes.

HERACLES Ah! would I could grow into a stone upon this spot, oblivious
of trouble! 

THESEUS Peace! give thy hand to a friend and helper. 

HERACLES Nay, let me not wipe off the blood upon thy robe.

THESEUS Wipe it off and spare not; I will not say thee nay.

HERACLES Reft of my own sons, I find thee as a son to me.

THESEUS Throw thy arm about my neck; I will be thy guide.

HERACLES A pair of friends in sooth are we, but one a man of sorrows.
Ah! aged sire, this is the kind of man to make a friend.

AMPHITRYON Blest in her sons, the country that gave him birth!

HERACLES O Theseus, turn me back again to see my babes.

THESEUS What charm dost think to find in this to soothe thy soul?

HERACLES I long to do so, and would fain embrace my sire.

AMPHITRYON Here am I, my son; thy wish is no less dear to me.

THESEUS Hast thou so short a memory for thy troubles? 

HERACLES All that I endured of yore was easier to bear than this.

THESEUS If men see thee play the woman, they will scoff.

HERACLES Have I by living grown so abject in thy sight? 'twas not
so once, methinks. 

THESEUS Aye, too much so; for how dost show thyself the glorious
Heracles of yore? 

HERACLES What about thyself? what kind of hero wert thou when in
trouble in the world below? 

THESEUS I was worse than anyone as far as courage went.

HERACLES How then canst thou say of me, that I am abased by my troubles?

THESEUS Forward! 

HERACLES Farewell, my aged sire! 

AMPHITRYON Farewell to thee, my son! 

HERACLES Bury my children as I said. 

AMPHITRYON But who will bury me, my son? 

HERACLES I will. 

AMPHITRYON When wilt thou come? 

HERACLES After thou hast buried my children. 

AMPHITRYON How? 

HERACLES I will fetch thee from Thebes to Athens. But carry my children
within, a grievous burden to the earth. And I, after ruining my house
by deeds of shame, will follow in the wake of Theseus, totally destroyed.
Whoso prefers wealth or might to the possession of good friends, thinketh
amiss.  (THESEUS and his attendants lead HERACLES away.)

CHORUS  (chanting) With grief and many a bitter tear we go our way,
robbed of all we prized most dearly. 

THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the royal palace at Troezen. There is a statue of APHRODITE
on one side; on the other, a statue of ARTEMIS. There is an altar
before each image. The goddess APHRODITE appears alone.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

APHRODITE Wide o'er man my realm extends, and proud the name that
I, the goddess Cypris, bear, both in heaven's courts and 'mongst all
those who dwell within the limits of the sea and the bounds of Atlas,
beholding the sun-god's light; those that respect my power I advance
to honour, but bring to ruin all who vaunt themselves at me. For even
in the race of gods this feeling finds a home, even pleasure at the
honour men pay them. And the truth of this I soon will show; for that
son of Theseus, born of the Amazon, Hippolytus, whom holy Pittheus
taught, alone of all the dwellers in this land of Troezen, calls me
vilest of the deities. Love he scorns, and, as for marriage, will
none of it; but Artemis, daughter of Zeus, sister of Phoebus, he doth
honour, counting her the chief of goddesses, and ever through the
greenwood, attendant on his virgin goddess, he clears the earth of
wild beasts with his fleet hounds, enjoying the comradeship of one
too high for mortal ken. 'Tis not this I grudge him, no! why should
I? But for his sins against me, I will this very day take vengeance
on Hippolytus; for long ago I cleared the ground of many obstacles,
so it needs but trifling toil. For as he came one day from the home
of Pittheus to witness the solemn mystic rites and be initiated therein
in Pandion's land, Phaedra, his father's noble wife, caught sight
of him, and by my designs she found her heart was seized with wild
desire. And ere she came to this Troezenian realm, a temple did she
rear to Cypris hard by the rock of Pallas where it o'erlooks this
country, for love of the youth in another land; and to win his love
in days to come she called after his name the temple she had founded
for the goddess. Now, when Theseus left the land of Cecrops, flying
the pollution of the blood of Pallas' sons, and with his wife sailed
to this shore, content to suffer exile for a year, then began the
wretched wife to pine away in silence, moaning 'neath love's cruel
scourge, and none of her servants knows what disease afflicts her.
But this passion of hers must not fail thus. No, I will discover the
matter to Theseus, and all shall be laid bare. Then will the father
slay his child, my bitter foe, by curses, for the lord Poseidon granted
this boon to Theseus; three wishes of the god to ask, nor ever ask
in vain. So Phaedra is to die, an honoured death 'tis true, but still
to die; for I will not let her suffering outweigh the payment of such
forfeit by my foes as shall satisfy my honour. But lo! I see the son
of Theseus coming hither-Hippolytus, fresh from the labours of the
chase. I will get me hence. At his back follows a long train of retainers,
in joyous cries of revelry uniting and hymns of praise to Artemis,
his goddess; for little he recks that Death hath oped his gates for
him, and that this is his last look upon the light.  (APHRODITE vanishes.
HIPPOLYTUS and his retinue of hunting ATTENDANTS enter, singing. They
move to worship at the altar of ARTEMIS.)  

HIPPOLYTUS Come follow, friends, singing to Artemis, daughter of
Zeus, throned in the sky, whose votaries we are. 

ATTENDANTS Lady goddess, awful queen, daughter of Zeus, all hail!
hail! of Latona and of Zeus, peerless mid the virgin choir, who hast
thy dwelling in heaven's wide mansions at thy noble father's court,
in the golden house of Zeus. All hail! most beauteous Artemis, lovelier
far than all the daughters of Olympus! 

HIPPOLYTUS  (speaking) For thee, O mistress mine, I bring this woven
wreath, culled from a virgin meadow, where nor shepherd dares to herd
his flock nor ever scythe hath mown, but o'er the mead unshorn the
bee doth wing its way in spring; and with the dew from rivers drawn
purity that garden tends. Such as know no cunning lore, yet in whose
nature self-control, made perfect, hath a home, these may pluck the
flowers, but not the wicked world. Accept, I pray, dear mistress,
mine this chaplet from my holy hand to crown thy locks of gold; for
I, and none other of mortals, have this high guerdon, to be with thee,
with thee converse, hearing thy voice, though not thy face beholding.
So be it mine to end my life as I began. 

LEADER OF THE ATTENDANTS My prince! we needs must call upon the gods,
our lords, so wilt thou listen to a friendly word from me?

HIPPOLYTUS Why, that will I! else were I proved a fool.

LEADER Dost know, then, the way of the world? 

HIPPOLYTUS Not I; but wherefore such a question? 

LEADER It hates reserve which careth not for all men's love.

HIPPOLYTUS And rightly too; reserve in man is ever galling.

LEADER But there's a charm in courtesy? 

HIPPOLYTUS The greatest surely; aye, and profit, too, at trifling
cost. 

LEADER Dost think the same law holds in heaven as well?

HIPPOLYTUS I trow it doth, since all our laws we men from heaven
draw. 

LEADER Why, then, dost thou neglect to greet an august goddess?

HIPPOLYTUS Whom speak'st thou of? Keep watch upon thy tongue lest
it same mischief cause. 

LEADER Cypris I mean, whose image is stationed o'er thy gate.

HIPPOLYTUS I greet her from afar, preserving still my chastity.

LEADER Yet is she an august goddess, far renowned on earth.

HIPPOLYTUS 'Mongst gods as well as men we have our several preferences.

LEADER I wish thee luck, and wisdom too, so far as thou dost need
it. 

HIPPOLYTUS No god, whose worship craves the night, hath charms for
me. 

LEADER My son, we should avail us of the gifts that gods confer.

HIPPOLYTUS Go in, my faithful followers, and make ready food within
the house; a well-filled board hath charms after the chase is o'er.
Rub down my steeds ye must, that when I have had my fill I may yoke
them to the chariot and give them proper exercise. As for thy Queen
of Love, a long farewell to her.  (HIPPOLYTUS goes into the palace,
followed by all the ATTENDANTS except the LEADER, who prays before
the statue of APHRODITE.)  

LEADER Meantime I with sober mind, for I must not copy my young master,
do offer up my prayer to thy image, lady Cypris, in such words as
it becomes a slave to use. But thou should'st pardon all, who, in
youth's impetuous heat, speak idle words of thee; make as though thou
hearest not, for gods must needs be wiser than the sons of men.  (The
LEADER goes into the palace. The CHORUS OF TROEZENIAN WOMEN enters.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

A rock there is, where, as they say, the ocean dew distils, and from
its beetling brow it pours a copious stream for pitchers to be dipped
therein; 'twas here I had a friend washing robes of purple in the
trickling stream, and she was spreading them out on the face of warm
sunny rock; from her I had the tidings, first of all, that my mistress-

(antistrophe 1)

Was wasting on the bed of sickness, pent within her house, a thin
veil o'ershadowing her head of golden hair. And this is the third
day I hear that she hath closed her lovely lips and denied her chaste
body all sustenance, eager to hide her suffering and reach death's
cheerless bourn. 

(strophe 2)

Maiden, thou must be possessed, by Pan made frantic or by Hecate,
or by the Corybantes dread, and Cybele the mountain mother. Or maybe
thou hast sinned against Dictynna, huntress-queen, and art wasting
for thy guilt in sacrifice unoffered. For she doth range o'er lakes'
expanse and past the bounds of earth upon the ocean's tossing billows.

(antistrophe 2)

Or doth some rival in thy house beguile thy lord, the captain of
Erechtheus' sons, that hero nobly born, to secret amours hid from
thee? Or hath some mariner sailing hither from Crete reached this
port that sailors love, with evil tidings for our queen, and she with
sorrow for her grievous fate is to her bed confined? 

(epode)

Yea, and oft o'er woman's wayward nature settles a feeling of miserable
helplessness, arising from pains of child-birth or of passionate desire.
I, too, have felt at times this sharp thrill shoot through me, but
I would cry to Artemis, queen of archery, who comes from heaven to
aid us in our travail, and thanks to heaven's grace she ever comes
at my call with welcome help. Look! where the aged nurse is bringing
her forth from the house before the door, while on her brow the cloud
of gloom is deepening. My soul longs to learn what is her grief, the
canker that is wasting our queen's fading charms.  (PHAEDRA is led
out and placed upon a couch by the NURSE and attendants. The following
lines between the NURSE and PHAEDRA are chanted.)  

NURSE O, the ills of mortal men! the cruel diseases they endure!
What can I do for thee? from what refrain? Here is the bright sunlight,
here the azure sky; lo! we have brought thee on thy bed of sickness
without the palace; for all thy talk was of coming hither, but soon
back to thy chamber wilt thou hurry. Disappointment follows fast with
thee, thou hast no joy in aught for long; the present has no power
to please; on something absent next thy heart is set. Better be sick
than tend the sick; the first is but a single ill, the last unites
mental grief with manual toil. Man's whole life is full of anguish;
no respite from his woes he finds; but if there is aught to love beyond
this life, night's dark pall doth wrap it round. And so we show our
mad love of this life because its light is shed on earth, and because
we know no other, and have naught revealed to us of all our earth
may hide; and trusting to fables we drift at random. 

PHAEDRA  (wildly) Lift my body, raise my head! My limbs are all unstrung,
kind friends. O handmaids, lift my arms, my shapely arms. The tire
on my head is too heavy for me to wear; away with it, and let my tresses
o'er my shoulders fall. 

Be of good heart, dear child; toss not so wildly to and fro. Lie still,
be brave, so wilt thou find thy sickness easier to bear; suffering
for mortals is nature's iron law. 

PHAEDRA Ah! would I could draw a draught of water pure from some
dew-fed spring, and lay me down to rest in the grassy meadow 'neath
the poplar's shade! 

NURSE My child, what wild speech is this? O say not such things in
public, wild whirling words of frenzy bred! 

PHAEDRA Away to the mountain take me! to the wood, to the pine-trees
will go, where hounds pursue the prey, hard on the scent of dappled
fawns. Ye gods! what joy to hark them on, to grasp the barbed dart,
to poise Thessalian hunting-spears close to my golden hair, then let
them fly. 

NURSE Why, why, my child, these anxious cares? What hast thou to
do with the chase? Why so eager for the flowing spring, when hard
by these towers stands a hill well watered, whence thou may'st freely
draw? 

PHAEDRA O Artemis, who watchest o'er sea-beat Limna and the race-course
thundering to the horse's hoofs, would I were upon thy plains curbing
Venetian steeds! 

NURSE Why betray thy frenzy in these wild whirling words? Now thou
wert for hasting hence to the hills away to hunt wild beasts, and
now thy yearning is to drive the steed over the waveless sands. This
needs a cunning seer to say what god it is that reins thee from the
course, distracting thy senses, child. 

PHAEDRA  (more sanely) Ah me! alas! what have I done? Whither have
I strayed, my senses leaving? Mad, mad! stricken by some demon's curse!
Woe is me! Cover my head again, nurse. Shame fills me for the words
I have spoken. Hide me then; from my eyes the tear-drops stream, and
for very shame I turn them away. 'Tis painful coming to one's senses
again, and madness, evil though it be, has this advantage, that one
has no knowledge of reason's overthrow. 

NURSE There then I cover thee; but when will death hide my body in
the grave? Many a lesson length of days is teaching me. Yea, mortal
men should pledge themselves to moderate friendships only, not to
such as reach the very heart's core; affection's ties should be light
upon them to let them slip or draw them tight. For one poor heart
to grieve for twain, as I do for my mistress, is a burden sore to
bear. Men say that too engrossing pursuits in life more oft cause
disappointment than pleasure, and too oft are foes to health. Wherefore
do not praise excess so much as moderation, and with me wise men will
agree.  (PHAEDRA lies back upon the couch.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS  (speaking) O aged dame, faithful nurse of Phaedra,
our queen, we see her sorry plight; but what it is that ails her we
cannot discern, so fain would learn of thee and hear thy opinion.

NURSE I question her, but am no wiser, for she will not answer.

LEADER Nor tell what source these sorrows have? 

NURSE The same answer thou must take, for she is dumb on every point.

LEADER How weak and wasted is her body! 

NURSE What marvel? 'tis three days now since she has tasted food.

LEADER Is this infatuation, or an attempt to die? 

NURSE 'Tis death she courts; such fasting aims at ending life.

LEADER A strange story if it satisfies her husband. 

NURSE She hides from him her sorrow, and vows she is not ill.

LEADER Can he not guess it from her face? 

NURSE He is not now in his own country. 

LEADER But dost not thou insist in thy endeavour to find out her
complaint, her mind? 

NURSE I have tried every plan, and all in vain; yet not even now
will I relax my zeal, that thou too, if thou stayest, mayst witness
my devotion to my unhappy mistress. Come, come, my darling child,
let us forget, the twain of us, our former words; be thou more mild,
smoothing that sullen brow and changing the current of thy thought,
and I, if in aught before failed in humouring thee, will let that
be and find some better course. If thou art sick with ills thou canst
not name, there be women here to help to set thee right; but if thy
trouble can to men's ears be divulged, speak, that physicians may
pronounce on it. Come, then, why so dumb? Thou shouldst not so remain,
my child, but scold me if I speak amiss, or, if I give good counsel,
yield assent. One word, one look this way! Ah me! Friends, we waste
our toil to no purpose; we are as far away as ever; she would not
relent to my arguments then, nor is she yielding now. Well, grow more
stubborn than the sea, yet be assured of this, that if thou diest
thou art a traitress to thy children, for they will ne'er inherit
their father's halls, nay, by that knightly queen the Amazon who bore
a son to lord it over thine, a bastard born but not a bastard bred,
whom well thou knowest, e'en Hippolytus-  (At the mention of his name
PHAEDRA'S attention is suddenly caught.)  

PHAEDRA Oh! oh! 

NURSE Ha! doth that touch the quick? 

PHAEDRA Thou hast undone me, nurse; I do adjure by the gods, mention
that man no more. 

NURSE There now! thou art thyself again, but e'en yet refusest to
aid thy children and preserve thy life. 

PHAEDRA My babes I love, but there is another storm that buffets
me. 

NURSE Daughter, are thy hands from bloodshed pure? 

PHAEDRA My hands are pure, but on my soul there rests a stain.

NURSE The issue of some enemy's secret witchery? 

PHAEDRA A friend is my destroyer, one unwilling as myself.

NURSE Hath Theseus wronged thee in any wise? 

PHAEDRA Never may I prove untrue to himl 

NURSE Then what strange mystery is there that drives thee on to die?

PHAEDRA O, let my sin and me alone, 'tis not 'gainst thee I sin.

NURSE Never willingly! and, if I fail, 'twill rest at thy door.

PHAEDRA How now? thou usest force in clinging to my hand.

NURSE Yea, and I will never loose my hold upon thy knees.

PHAEDRA Alas for thee! my sorrows, shouldst thou learn them, would
recoil on thee. 

NURSE What keener grief for me than failing to win thee?

PHAEDRA 'Twill be death to thee; though to me that brings renown.

NURSE And dost thou then conceal this boon despite my prayers?

PHAEDRA I do, for 'tis out of shame I am planning an honourable escape.

NURSE Tell it, and thine honour shall the brighter shine.

PHAEDRA Away, I do conjure thee; loose my hand. 

NURSE I will not, for the boon thou shouldst have granted me is denied.

PHAEDRA I will grant it out of reverence for thy holy suppliant touch.

NURSE Henceforth I hold my peace; 'tis thine to speak from now.

PHAEDRA Ah! hapless mother, what a love was thine! 

NURSE Her love for the bull? daughter, or what meanest thou?

PHAEDRA And woe to thee! my sister, bride of Dionysus. 

NURSE What ails thee, child? speaking ill of kith and kin.

PHAEDRA Myself the third to suffer! how am I undone! 

NURSE Thou strik'st me dumb! Where will this history end?

PHAEDRA That "love" has been our curse from time long past.

NURSE I know no more of what I fain would learn. 

PHAEDRA Ah! would thou couldst say for me what I have to tell.

NURSE I aw no prophetess to unriddle secrets. 

PHAEDRA What is it they mean when they talk of people being in "love-"?

NURSE At once the sweetest and the bitterest thing, my child.

PHAEDRA I shall only find the latter half. 

NURSE Ha! my child, art thou in love? 

PHAEDRA The Amazon's son, whoever he may be- 

NURSE Mean'st thou Hippolytus? 

PHAEDRA 'Twas thou, not I, that spoke his name. 

NURSE O heavens! what is this, my child? Thou hast ruined me. Outrageous!
friends; I will not live and bear it; hateful is life, hateful to
mine eyes the light. This body I resign, will cast it off, and rid
me of existence by my death. Farewell, my life is o'er. Yea, for the
chaste I have wicked passions, 'gainst their will maybe, but still
they have. Cypris, it seems, is not goddess after all, but something
greater far, for she hath been the ruin of my lady and of me and our
whole family. 

CHORUS  (chanting) O, too clearly didst thou hear our queen uplift
her voice to tell her startling tale of piteous suffering. Come death
ere I reach thy state of feeling, loved mistress. O horrible! woe,
for these miseries! woe, for the sorrows on which mortals feed! Thou
art undone! thou hast disclosed thy sin to heaven's light. What hath
each passing day and every hour in store for thee? Some strange event
will come to pass in this house. For it is no longer uncertain where
the star of thy love is setting, thou hapless daughter of Crete.

PHAEDRA Women of Troezen, who dwell here upon the frontier edge of
Pelops' land, oft ere now in heedless mood through the long hours
of night have I wondered why man's life is spoiled; and it seems to
me their evil case is not due to any natural fault of judgment, for
there be many dowered with sense, but we must view the matter in this
light: by teaching and experience to learn the right but neglect it
in practice, some from sloth, others from preferring pleasure of some
kind or other to duty. Now life has many pleasures, protracted talk,
and leisure, that seductive evil; likewise there is shame which is
of two kinds, one a noble quality, the other a curse to families;
but if for each its proper time were clearly known, these twain could
not have had the selfsame letters to denote them. So then since I
had made up my mind on these points, 'twas not likely any drug would
alter it and make me think the contrary. And I will tell the too the
way my judgment went. When love wounded me, I bethought me how I best
might bear the smart. So from that day forth I began to hide in silence
what I suffered. For I put no faith in counsellors, who know well
to lecture others for presumption, yet themselves have countless troubles
of their own. Next I did devise noble endurance of these wanton thoughts,
striving by continence for victory. And last when I could not succeed
in mastering love hereby, methought it best to die; and none can gainsay
my purpose. For fain I would my virtue should to all appear, my shame
have few to witness it. I knew my sickly passion now; to yield to
it I saw how infamous; and more, I learnt to know so well that I was
but woman, a thing the world detests. Curses, hideous curses on that
wife who first did shame her marriage-vow for lovers other than her
lord! 'Twas from noble families this curse began to spread among our
sex. For when the noble countenance disgrace, poor folk of course
will think that it is right. Those too I hate who make profession
of purity, though in secret reckless sinners. How can these, queen
Cypris, ocean's child, e'er look their husbands in the face? do they
never feel one guilty thrill that their accomplice, night, or the
chambers of their house will find a voice and speak? This it is that
calls on me to die, kind friends, that so I may ne'er be found to
have disgraced my lord, or the children I have borne; no! may they
grow up and dwell in glorious Athens, free to speak and act, heirs
to such fair fame as a mother can bequeath. For to know that father
or mother has sinned doth turn the stoutest heart to slavishness.
This alone, men say, can stand the buffets of life's battle, a just
and virtuous soul in whomsoever found. For time unmasks the villain
soon or late, holding up to them a mirror as to some blooming maid.
'Mongst such may I be never seen! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Now look! how fair is chastity however viewed,
whose fruit is good repute amongst men. 

NURSE My queen, 'tis true thy tale of woe, but lately told, did for
the moment strike me with wild alarm, but now I do reflect upon my
foolishness; second thoughts are often best even with men. Thy fate
is no uncommon nor past one's calculations; thou art stricken by the
passion Cypris sends. Thou art in love; what wonder? so are many more.
Wilt thou, because thou lov'st, destroy thyself? 'Tis little gain,
I trow, for those who love or yet may love their fellows, if death
must be their end; for though the Love-Queen's onset in her might
is more than man can bear, yet doth she gently visit yielding hearts,
and only when she finds a proud unnatural spirit, doth she take and
mock it past belief. Her path is in the sky, and mid the ocean's surge
she rides; from her all nature springs; she sows the seeds of love,
inspires the warm desire to which we sons of earth all owe our being.
They who have aught to do with books of ancient scribes, or themselves
engage in studious pursuits, know how Zeus of Semele was enamoured,
how the bright-eyed goddess of the Dawn once stole Cephalus to dwell
in heaven for the love she bore him; yet these in heaven abide nor
shun the gods' approach, content, I trow, to yield to their misfortune.
Wilt thou refuse to yield? thy sire, it seems, should have begotten
thee on special terms or with different gods for masters, if in these
laws thou wilt not acquiesce. How many, prithee, men of sterling sense,
when they see their wives unfaithful, make as though they saw it not?
How many fathers, when their sons have gone astray, assist them in
their amours? 'Tis part of human wisdom to conceal the deed of shame.
Nor should man aim at too great refinement in his life; for they cannot
with exactness finish e'en the roof that covers in a house; and how
dost thou, after falling into so deep a pit, think to escape? Nay,
if thou hast more of good than bad, thou wilt fare exceeding well,
thy human nature considered. O cease, my darling child, from evil
thoughts, let wanton pride be gone, for this is naught else, this
wish to rival gods in perfectness. Face thy love; 'tis heaven's will
thou shouldst. Sick thou art, yet turn thy sickness to some happy
issue. For there are charms and spells to soothe the soul; surely
some cure for thy disease will be found. Men, no doubt, might seek
it long and late if our women's minds no scheme devise. 

LEADER Although she gives thee at thy present need the wiser counsel,
Phaedra, yet do I praise thee. Still my praise may sound more harsh
and jar more cruelly on thy ear than her advice. 

PHAEDRA 'Tis even this, too plausible a tongue, that overthrows good
governments and homes of men. We should not speak to please the ear
but point the path that leads to noble fame. 

NURSE What means this solemn speech? Thou needst not rounded phrases,-but
a man. Straightway must we move to tell him frankly how it is with
thee. Had not thy life to such a crisis come, or wert thou with self-control
I endowed, ne'er would I to gratify thy passions have urged thee to
this course; but now 'tis a struggle fierce to save thy life, and
therefore less to blame. 

PHAEDRA Accursed proposal! peace, woman! never utter those shameful
words again! 

NURSE Shameful, maybe, yet for thee better than honour's code. Better
this deed, if it shall save thy life, than that name thy pride will
kill thee to retain. 

PHAEDRA I conjure thee, go no further! for thy words are plausible
but infamous; for though as yet love has not undermined my soul, yet,
if in specious words thou dress thy foul suggestion, I shall be beguiled
into the snare from which I am now escaping. 

NURSE If thou art of this mind, 'twere well thou ne'er hadst sinned;
but as it is, hear me; for that is the next best course; I in my house
have charms to soothe thy love,-'twas but now I thought of them;-these
shall cure thee of thy sickness on no disgraceful terms, thy mind
unhurt, if thou wilt be but brave. But from him thou lovest we must
get some token, word or fragment of his robe, and thereby unite in
one love's twofold stream. 

PHAEDRA Is thy drug a salve or potion? 

NURSE I cannot tell; be content, my child, to profit by it and ask
no questions. 

PHAEDRA I fear me thou wilt prove too wise for me. 

NURSE If thou fear this, confess thyself afraid of all; but why thy
terror! 

PHAEDRA Lest thou shouldst breathe a word of this to Theseus' son.

NURSE Peace, my child! I will do all things well; only be thou, queen
Cypris, ocean's child, my partner in the work! And for the rest of
my purpose, it will be enough for me to tell it to our friends within
the house.  (The NURSE goes into the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

O Love, Love, that from the eyes diffusest soft desire, bringing
on the souls of those, whom thou dost camp against, sweet grace, O
never in evil mood appear to me, nor out of time and tune approach!
Nor fire nor meteor hurls a mightier bolt than Aphrodite's shaft shot
by the hands of Love, the child of Zeus. 

(antistrophe 1)

Idly, idly by the streams of Alpheus and in the Pythian shrines of
Phoebus, Hellas heaps the slaughtered steers; while Love we worship
not, Love, the king of men, who holds the key to Aphrodite's sweetest
bower,-worship not him who, when he comes, lays waste and marks his
path to mortal hearts by wide-spread woe. 

(strophe 2)

There was that maiden in Oechalia, a girl unwed, that knew no wooer
yet nor married joys; her did the Queen of Love snatch from her home
across the sea and gave unto Alcmena's son, mid blood and smoke and
murderous marriage-hymns, to be to him a frantic fiend of hell; woe!
woe for his wooing! 

(antistrophe 2)

Ah! holy walls of Thebes, ah! fount of Dirce, ye could testify what
course the love-queen follows. For with the blazing levin-bolt did
she cut short the fatal marriage of Semele, mother of Zeus-born Bacchus.
All things she doth inspire, dread goddess, winging her flight hither
and thither like a bee. 

PHAEDRA Peace, oh women, peace! I am undone. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS What, Phaedra, is this dread event within thy
house? 

PHAEDRA Hush! let me hear what those within are saying.

LEADER I am silent; this is surely the prelude to evil.

PHAEDRA  (chanting) Great gods! how awful are my sufferings!

CHORUS  (chanting) What a cry was there! what loud alarm! say what
sudden terror, lady, doth thy soul dismay. 

PHAEDRA I am undone. Stand here at the door and hear the noise arising
in the house. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Thou art already by the bolted door; 'tis for
thee to note the sounds that issue from within. And tell me, O tell
me what evil can be on foot. 

PHAEDRA 'Tis the son of the horse-loving Amazon who calls, Hippolytus,
uttering foul curses on my servant. 

CHORUS  (chanting) I hear a noise but cannot dearly tell which way
it comes. Ah! 'tis through the door the sound reached thee.

PHAEDRA Yes, yes, he is calling her plainly enough a go-between in
vice, traitress to her master's honour. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Woe, woe is me! thou art betrayed, dear mistress!
What counsel shall I give thee? thy secret is out; thou art utterly
undone. 

PHAEDRA Ah me! ah me! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Betrayed by friends! 

PHAEDRA She hath ruined me by speaking of my misfortune; 'twas kindly
meant, but an ill way to cure my malady. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O what wilt thou do now in thy cruel dilemma?

PHAEDRA I only know one way, one cure for these my woes, and that
is instant death.  (HIPPOLYTUS bursts out of the palace, followed
closely by the NURSE.)  

HIPPOLYTUS O mother earth! O sun's unclouded orb! What words, unfit
for any lips, have reached my ears! 

NURSE Peace, my son, lest some one hear thy outcry. 

HIPPOLYTUS I cannot hear such awful words and hold my peace.

NURSE I do implore thee by thy fair right hand. 

HIPPOLYTUS Let go my hand, touch not my robe. 

NURSE O by thy knees I pray, destroy me not utterly. 

HIPPOLYTUS Why say this, if, as thou pretendest, thy lips are free
from blame? 

NURSE My son, this is no story to be noised abroad. 

HIPPOLYTUS A virtuous tale grows fairer told to many. 

NURSE Never dishonour thy oath, my son. 

HIPPOLYTUS My tongue an oath did take, but not my heart.

NURSE My son, what wilt thou do? destroy thy friends? 

HIPPOLYTUS Friends indeed! the wicked are no friends of mine.

NURSE O pardon me; to err is only human, child. 

HIPPOLYTUS Great Zeus, why didst thou, to man's sorrow, put woman,
evil counterfeit, to dwell where shines the sun? If thou wert minded
that the human race should multiply, it was not from women they should
have drawn their stock, but in thy temples they should have paid gold
or iron or ponderous bronze and bought a family, each man proportioned
to his offering, and so in independence dwelt, from women free. But
now as soon as ever we would bring this plague into our home we bring
its fortune to the ground. 'Tis clear from this how great a curse
a woman is; the very father, that begot and nurtured her, to rid him
of the mischief, gives her a dower and packs her off; while the husband,
who takes the noxious weed into his home, fondly decks his sorry idol
in fine raiment and tricks her out in robes, squandering by degrees,
unhappy wight! his house's wealth. For he is in this dilemma; say
his marriage has brought him good connections, he is glad then to
keep the wife he loathes; or, if he gets a good wife but useless kin,
he tries to stifle the bad luck with the good. But it is easiest for
him who has settled in his house as wife mere cipher, incapable from
simplicity. I hate a clever woman; never may she set foot in my house
who aims at knowing more than women need; for in these clever women
Cypris implants a larger store of villainy, while the artless woman
is by her shallow wit from levity debarred. No servant should ever
have had access to a wife, but men should put to live with them beasts,
which bite, not talk, in which case they could not speak to any one
nor be answered back by them. But, as it is, the wicked in their chambers
plot wickedness, and their servants carry it abroad. Even thus, vile
wretch, thou cam'st to make me partner in an outrage on my father's
honour; wherefore I must wash that stain away in running streams,
dashing the water into my ears. How could I commit so foul a crime
when by the very mention of it I feel myself polluted? Be well assured,
woman, 'tis only my religious scruple saves thee. For had not I unawares
been caught by an oath, 'fore heaven! I would not have refrained from
telling all unto my father. But now I will from the house away, so
long as Theseus is abroad, and will maintain strict silence. But,
when my father comes, I will return and see how thou and thy mistress
face him, and so shall I learn by experience the extent of thy audacity.
Perdition seize you both! I can never satisfy my hate for women, no!
not even though some say this is ever my theme, for of a truth they
always are evil. So either let some one prove them chaste, or let
me still trample on them for ever.  (HIPPOLYTUS departs in anger.)

CHORUS  (chanting) O the cruel, unhappy fate of women! What arts,
what arguments have we, once we have made a slip, to loose by craft
the tight-drawn knot? 

PHAEDRA  (chanting) I have met my deserts. O earth, O light of day!
How can I escape the stroke of fate? How my pangs conceal, kind friends?
What god will appear to help me, what mortal to take my part or help
me in unrighteousness? The present calamity of my life admits of no
escape. Most hapless I of all my sex! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Alas, alas! the deed is done, thy servant's
schemes have gone awry, my queen, and all is lost. 

PHAEDRA  (to the NURSE) Accursed woman! traitress to thy friends!
How hast thou ruined me! May Zeus, my ancestor, smite thee with his
fiery bolt and uproot thee from thy place. Did I not foresee thy purpose,
did I not bid thee keep silence on the very matter which is now my
shame? But thou wouldst not be still; wherefore my fair name will
not go with me to the tomb. But now I must another scheme devise.
Yon youth, in the keenness of his fury, will tell his father of my
sin, and the aged Pittheus of my state and fill the world with stories
to my shame. Perdition seize thee and every meddling fool who by dishonest
means would serve unwilling friends! 

NURSE Mistress, thou may'st condemn the mischief I have done, for
sorrow's sting o'ermasters thy judgment; yet can I answer thee in
face of this, if thou wilt hear. 'Twas I who nurtured thee; I love
thee still; but in my search for medicine to cure thy sickness I found
what least I sought. Had I but succeeded, I had been counted wise,
for the credit we get for wisdom is measured by our success.

PHAEDRA Is it just, is it any satisfaction to me, that thou shouldst
wound me first, then bandy words with me? 

NURSE We dwell on this too long; I was not wise, I own; but there
are yet ways of escape from the trouble, my child. 

PHAEDRA Be dumb henceforth; evil was thy first advice to me, evil
too thy attempted scheme. Begone and leave me, look to thyself; I
will my own fortunes for the best arrange.  (The NURSE goes into the
palace.)  Ye noble daughters of Troezen, grant me the only boon I
crave; in silence bury what ye here have heard. 

LEADER By majestic Artemis, child of Zeus, I swear I will never divulge
aught of thy sorrows. 

PHAEDRA 'Tis well. But I, with all my thought, can but one way discover
out of this calamity, that so I may secure my children's honour, and
find myself some help as matters stand. For never, never will I bring
shame upon my Cretan home, nor will I, to save one poor life, face
Theseus after my disgrace. 

LEADER Art thou bent then on some cureless woe? 

PHAEDRA On death; the means thereto must I devise myself.

LEADER Hush! 

PHAEDRA Do thou at least advise me well. For this very day shall
I gladden Cypris, my destroyer, by yielding up my life, and shall
own myself vanquished by cruel love. Yet shall my dying be another's
curse, that he may learn not to exult at my misfortunes; but when
he comes to share the self-same plague with me, he will take a lesson
in wisdom.  (PHAEDRA enters the palace.)  

CHORUS  (chanting, strophe 1)

O to be nestling 'neath some pathless cavern, there by god's creating
hand to grow into a bird amid the winged tribes! Away would I soar
to Adria's wave-beat shore and to the waters of Eridanus; where a
father's hapless daughters in their grief for Phaethon distil into
the glooming flood the amber brilliance of their tears. 

(antistrophe 1)

And to the apple-bearing strand of those minstrels in the west then
would come, where ocean's lord no more to sailors grants passage o'er
the deep dark main, finding there the heaven's holy bound, upheld
by Atlas, where water from ambrosial founts wells up beside the couch
of Zeus inside his halls, and holy earth, the bounteous mother, causes
joy to spring in heavenly breasts. 

(strophe 2)

O white-winged bark, that o'er the booming ocean-wave didst bring
my royal mistress from her happy home, to crown her queen 'mongst
sorrow's brides! Surely evil omens from either port, at least from
Crete, were with that ship, what time to glorious Athens it sped its
way, and the crew made fast its twisted cable-ends upon the beach
of Munychus, and on the land stept out. 

(antistrophe 2)

Whence comes it that her heart is crushed, cruelly afflicted by Aphrodite
with unholy love; so she by bitter grief o'erwhelmed will tie a noose
within her bridal bower to fit it to her fair white neck, to modest
for this hateful lot in life, prizing o'er all her name and fame,
and striving thus to rid her soul of passion's sting.  (The NURSE
rushes out of the palace.)  

NURSE Help! ho! To the rescue all who near the palace stand! She
hath hung herself, our queen, the wife of Theseus. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Woe worth the day! the deed is done; our royal
mistress is no more, dead she hangs in the dangling noose.

NURSE Haste! some one bring a two-edged knife wherewith to cut the
knot about her neck. 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Friends, what shall we do? think you we should
enter the house, and loose the queen from the tight-drawn noose?

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Why should we? Are there not young servants here?
To do too much is not a safe course in life. 

NURSE Lay out the hapless corpse, straighten the limbs. This was
a bitter way to sit at home and keep my master's house!  (She goes
in.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS She is dead, poor lady; 'tis this I hear. Already
are they laying out the corpse.  (THESEUS and his retinue have entered,
unnoticed.)  

THESEUS Women, can ye tell me what the uproar in the palace means?
There came the sound of servants weeping bitterly to mine ear. None
of my household deign to open wide the gates and give me glad welcome
as traveller from prophetic shrines. Hath aught befallen old Pittheus?
No, Though he be well advanced in years, yet should I mourn, were
he to quit this house. 

LEADER 'Tis not against the old, Theseus, that fate, to strike thee,
aims this blow; prepare thy sorrow for a younger corpse.

THESEUS Woe is me! is it a child's life death robs me of?

LEADER They live; but, cruellest news of all for thee, their mother
is no more. 

THESEUS What! my wife dead? By what cruel stroke of chance?

LEADER About her neck she tied the hangman's knot. 

THESEUS Had grief so chilled her blood? or what had befallen her?

LEADER I know but this, for I am myself but now arrived at the house
to mourn thy sorrows, O Theseus. 

THESEUS Woe is me! why have I crowned my head with woven garlands,
when misfortune greets my embassage? Unbolt the doors, servants, loose
their fastenings, that I may see the piteous sight, my wife, whose
death is death to me.  (The central doors of the palace open, disclosing
the corpse.)  Woe! woe is thee for thy piteous lot! thou hast done
thyself a hurt deep enough to overthrow this family. Ah! ah! the daring
of it done to death by violence and unnatural means, the desperate
effort of thy own poor hand! Who cast the shadow o'er thy life, poor
lady? 

THESEUS  (chanting) Ah me, my cruel lot! sorrow hath done her worst
on me. O fortune, how heavily hast thou set thy foot on me and on
my house, by fiendish hands inflicting an unexpected stain? Nay, 'tis
complete effacement of my life, making it not to be lived; for I see,
alas! so wide an ocean of grief that I can never swim to shore again,
nor breast the tide of this calamity. How shall I speak of thee, my
poor wife, what tale of direst suffering tell? Thou art vanished like
a bird from the covert of my hand, taking one headlong leap from me
to Hades' halls. Alas, and woe! this is a bitter, bitter sight! This
must be a judgment sent by God for the sins of an ancestor, which
from some far source I am bringing on myself. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS My prince, 'tis not to thee alone such sorrows
come; thou hast lost a noble wife, but so have many others.

THESEUS  (chanting) Fain would I go hide me 'neath earth's blackest
depth, to dwell in darkness with the dead in misery, now that I am
reft of thy dear presence! for thou hast slain me than thyself e'en
more. Who can tell me what caused the fatal stroke that reached thy
heart, dear wife? Will no one tell me what befell? doth my palace
all in vain give shelter to a herd of menials? Woe, woe for thee,
my wife! sorrows past speech, past bearing, I behold within my house;
myself ruined man, my home a solitude, my children orphans!

CHORUS  (chanting) Gone and left us hast thou, fondest wife and noblest
of all women 'neath the sun's bright eye or night's star-lit radiance.
Poor house, what sorrows are thy portion now! My eyes are wet with
streams of tears to see thy fate; but the ill that is to follow has
long with terror filled me. 

THESEUS Ha! what means this letter? clasped in her dear hand it hath
some strange tale to tell. Hath she, poor lady, as a last request,
written her bidding as to my marriage and her children? Take heart,
poor ghost; no wife henceforth shall wed thy Theseus or invade his
house. Ah! how yon en ring affects my sight! Come, I will unfold the
sealed packet and read her letter's message to me. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Woe unto us! Here is yet another evil in the train
by heaven sent. Looking to what has happened, I should count my lot
in life no longer worth one's while to gain. My master's house, alas!
is ruined, brought to naught, I say. Spare it, O Heaven, if it may
be. Hearken to my prayer, for I see, as with prophetic eye, an omen
boding ill. 

THESEUS O horror! woe on woe! and still they come, too deep for words,
to heavy to bear. Ah me! 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS What is it? speak, if I may share in it.

THESEUS  (chanting) This letter loudly tells a hideous tale! where
can I escape my load of woe? For I am ruined and undone, so awful
are the words I find here written clear as if she cried them to me;
woe is me! 

LEADER Alas! thy words declare themselves the harbingers of woe.

THESEUS I can no longer keep the cursed tale within the portal of
my lips, cruel though its utterance be. Ah me! Hippolytus hath dared
by brutal force to violate my honour, recking naught of Zeus, whose
awful eye is over all. O father Poseidon, once didst thou promise
to fulfil three prayers of mine; answer one of these and slay my son,
let him not escape this single day, if the prayers thou gavest me
were indeed with issue fraught. 

LEADER O king, I do conjure thee, call back that prayer; hereafter
thou wilt know thy error. Hear, I pray. 

THESEUS It cannot be! Moreover I will banish him from this land,
and by one of two fates shall he be struck down; either Poseidon,
out of respect to my prayer, will cast his dead body into the house
of Hades; or exiled from this land, a wanderer to some foreign shore,
shall he eke out a life of misery. 

LEADER Lo! where himself doth come, thy son Hippolytus, in good time;
dismiss thy hurtful rage, King Theseus, and bethink thee what is best
for thy house,  (HIPPOLYTUS enters.)  

HIPPOLYTUS I heard thy voice, father, and hasted to come hither;
yet know I not the cause of thy present sorrow, but would fain learn
of thee.  (He sees PHAEDRA'S body.)  Ha! what is this? thy wife is
dead? 'Tis very strange; it was but now I left her; a moment since
she looked upon the light. How came she thus? the manner of her death?
this would I learn of thee, father. Art dumb? silence availeth not
in trouble; nay, for the heart that fain would know all must show
its curiosity even in sorrow's hour. Be sure it is not right, father,
to hide misfortunes from those who love, ay, more than love thee.

THESEUS O ye sons of men, victims of a thousand idle errors, why
teach your countless crafts, why scheme and seek to find a way for
everything, while one thing ye know not nor ever yet have made your
prize, a way to teach them wisdom whose souls are void of sense?

HIPPOLYTUS A very master in his craft the man, who can force fools
to be wise! But these ill-timed subtleties of thine, father, make
me fear thy tongue is running wild through trouble. 

THESEUS Fie upon thee! man needs should have some certain test set
up to try his friends, some touchstone of their hearts, to know each
friend whether he be true or false; all men should have two voices,
one the voice of honesty, expediency's the other, so would honesty
confute its knavish opposite, and then we could not be deceived.

HIPPOLYTUS Say, hath some friend been slandering me and hath he still
thine ear? and I, though guiltless, banned? I am amazed, for thy random,
frantic words fill me with wild alarm. 

THESEUS O the mind of mortal man! to what lengths will it proceed?
What limit will its bold assurance have? for if it goes on growing
as man's life advances, and each successor outdo the man before him
in villainy, the gods will have to add another sphere unto the world,
which shall take in the knaves and villians. Behold this man; he,
my own son, hath outraged mine honour, his guilt most clearly proved
by my dead wife. Now, since thou hast dared this loathly crime, come,
look thy father in the face. Art thou the man who dost with gods consort,
as one above the vulgar herd? art thou the chaste and sinless saint?
Thy boasts will never persuade me to be guilty of attributing ignorance
to gods. Go then, vaunt thyself, and drive thy petty trade in viands
formed of lifeless food; take Orpheus for thy chief and go a-revelling,
with all honour for the vapourings of many a written scroll, seeing
thou now art caught. Let all beware, I say, of such hypocrites! who
hunt their prey with fine words, and all the while are scheming villainy.
She is dead; dost think that this will save thee? Why this convicts
thee more than all, abandoned wretch! What oaths, what pleas can outweigh
this letter, so that thou shouldst 'scape thy doom? Thou wilt assert
she hated thee, that 'twixt the bastard and the true-born child nature
has herself put war; it seems then by thy showing she made a sorry
bargain with her life, if to gratify her hate of thee she lost what
most she prized. 'Tis said, no doubt, that frailty finds no place
in man but is innate in woman; my experience is, young men are no
more secure than women, whenso the Queen of Love excites a youthful
breast; although their sex comes in to help them. Yet why do I thus
bandy words with thee, when before me lies the corpse, to be the clearest
witness? Begone at once, an exile from this land, and ne'er set foot
again in god-built Athens nor in the confines of my dominion. For
if I am tamely to submit to this treatment from such as thee, no more
will Sinis, robber of the Isthmus, bear me witness how I slew him,
but say my boasts are idle, nor will those rocks Scironian, that fringe
the sea, call me the miscreants' scourge. 

LEADER I know not how to call happy any child of man; for that which
was first has turned and now is last. 

HIPPOLYTUS Father, thy wrath and the tension of thy mind are terrible;
yet this charge, specious though its arguments appear, becomes a calumny,
if one lay it bare. Small skill have I in speaking to a crowd, but
have a readier wit for comrades of mine own age and small companies.
Yea, and this is as it should be; for they, whom the wise despise,
are better qualified to speak before a mob. Yet am I constrained under
the present circumstances to break silence. And at the outset will
I take the point which formed the basis of thy stealthy attack on
me, designed to put me out of court unheard; dost see yon sun, this
earth? These do not contain, for all thou dost deny it, chastity surpassing
mine. To reverence God I count the highest knowledge, and to adopt
as friends not those who attempt injustice, but such as would blush
to propose to their companions aught disgraceful or pleasure them
by shameful services; to mock at friends is not my way, father, but
I am still the same behind their backs as to their face. The very
crime thou thinkest to catch me in, is just the one I am untainted
with, for to this day have I kept me pure from women. Nor know I aught
thereof, save what I hear or see in pictures, for I have no wish to
look even on these, so pure my virgin soul. I grant my claim to chastity
may not convince thee; well, 'tis then for thee to show the way I
was corrupted. Did this woman exceed in beauty all her sex? Did aspire
to fill the husband's place after thee and succeed to thy house? That
surely would have made me out a fool, a creature void of sense. Thou
wilt say, "Your chaste man loves to lord it." No, no! say I, sovereignty
pleases only those whose hearts are quite corrupt. Now, I would be
the first and best at all the games in Hellas, but second in the state,
for ever happy thus with the noblest for my friends. For there one
may be happy, and the absence of danger gives a charm beyond all princely
joys. One thing I have not said, the rest thou hast. Had I a witness
to attest my purity, and were I pitted 'gainst her still alive, facts
would show thee on enquiry who the culprit was. Now by Zeus, the god
of oaths, and by the earth, whereon we stand, I swear to thee I never
did lay hand upon thy wife nor would have wished to, or have harboured
such a thought. Slay me, ye gods! rob me of name and honour, from
home and city cast me forth, a wandering exile o'er the earth! nor
sea nor land receive my bones when I am dead, if I am such a miscreant!
I cannot say if she through fear destroyed herself, for more than
this am I forbid. With her discretion took the place of chastity,
while I, though chaste, was not discreet in using this virtue.

LEADER Thy oath by heaven, strong security, sufficiently refutes
the charge. 

THESEUS A wizard or magician must the fellow be, to think he can
first flout me, his father, then by coolness master my resolve.

HIPPOLYTUS Father, thy part in this doth fill me with amaze; wert
thou my son and I thy sire, by heaven! I would have slain, not let
thee off with banishment, hadst thou presumed to violate my honour.

THESEUS A just remark! yet shalt thou not die by the sentence thine
own lips pronounce upon thyself; for death, that cometh in a moment,
is an easy end for wretchedness. Nay, thou shalt be exiled from thy
fatherland, and wandering to a foreign shore drag out a life of misery,
for such are the wages of sin. 

HIPPOLYTUS Oh! what wilt thou do? Wilt thou banish me, without so
much as waiting for Time's evidence on my case? 

THESEUS Ay, beyond the sea, beyond the bounds of Atlas, if I could,
so deeply do I hate thee. 

HIPPOLYTUS What! banish me untried, without even testing my oath,
the pledge offer, or the voice of seers? 

THESEUS This letter here, though it bears no seers' signs, arraigns
thy pledges; as for birds that fly o'er our heads, a long farewell
to them. 

HIPPOLYTUS  (aside) Great gods! why do I not unlock my lips, seeing
that I am ruined by you, the objects of my reverence? No, I will not;
I should nowise persuade those whom I ought to, and in vain should
break the oath I swore. 

THESEUS Fie upon thee! that solemn air of thine is more than I can
bear. Begone from thy native land forthwith! 

HIPPOLYTUS Whither shall I turn? Ah me! whose friendly house will
take me in, an exile on so grave, a charge? 

THESEUS Seek one who loves to entertain as guests and partners in
his crimes corrupters of men's wives. 

HIPPOLYTUS Ah me! this wounds my heart and brings me nigh to tears
to think that I should appear so vile, and thou believe me so.

THESEUS Thy tears and forethought had been more in season when thou
didst presume to outrage thy father's wife. 

HIPPOLYTUS O house, I would thou couldst speak for me and witness
if I am so vile! 

THESEUS Dost fly to speechless witnesses? This deed, though it speaketh
not, proves thy guilt clearly. 

HIPPOLYTUS Alas! Would I could stand and face myself, so should I
weep to see the sorrows I endure. 

THESEUS Ay, 'tis thy character to honour thyself far more than reverence
thy parents, as thou shouldst. 

HIPPOLYTUS Unhappy mother! son of sorrow! Heaven keep all friends
of mine from bastard birth! 

THESEUS Ho! servants, drag him hence! You heard my proclamation long
ago condemning him to exile. 

HIPPOLYTUS Whoso of them doth lay a hand on me shall rue it; thyself
expel me, if thy spirit move thee, from the land. 

THESEUS I will, unless my word thou straight obey; no pity for thy
exile steals into my heart.  (THESEUS goes in. The central doors of
the palace are closed.)  

HIPPOLYTUS The sentence then, it seems, is passed. Ah, misery! How
well I know the truth herein, but know no way to tell it! O daughter
of Latona, dearest to me of all deities, partner, comrade in the chase,
far from glorious Athens must I fly. Farewell, city and land of Erechtheus;
farewell, Troezen, most joyous home wherein to pass the spring of
life; 'tis my last sight of thee, farewell! Come, my comrades in this
land, young like me, greet me kindly and escort me forth, for never
will ye behold a purer soul, for all my father's doubts.  (HIPPOLYTUS
departs. Many follow him.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

In very deed the thoughts I have about the gods, whenso they come
into my mind, do much to soothe its grief, but though I cherish secret
hopes of some great guiding will, yet am I at fault when survey the
fate and doings of the sons of men; change succeeds to change, and
man's life veers and shifts in endless restlessness. 

(antistrophe 1)

Fortune grant me this, I pray, at heaven's hand,-a happy lot in life
and a soul from sorrow free; opinions let me hold not too precise
nor yet too hollow; but, lightly changing my habits to each morrow
as it comes, may I thus attain a life of bliss! 

(strophe 2)

For now no more is my mind free from doubts, unlooked-for sights
greet my vision; for lo! I see the morning star of Athens, eye of
Hellas, driven by his father's fury to another land. Mourn, ye sands
of my native shores, ye oak-groves on the hills, where with his fleet
hounds he would hunt the quarry to the death, attending on Dictynna,
awful queen. 

(antistrophe 2)

No more will he mount his car drawn by Venetian steeds, filling the
course round Limna with the prancing of his trained horses. Nevermore
in his father's house shall he wake the Muse that never slept beneath
his lute-strings; no hand will crown the spots where rests the maiden
Latona 'mid the boskage deep; nor evermore shall our virgins vie to
win thy love, now thou art banished. 

(epode)

While I with tears at thy unhappy fate shall endure a lot all undeserved.
Ah! hapless mother, in vain didst thou bring forth, it seems. I am
angered with the gods; out upon them! O ye linked Graces, why are
ye sending from his native land this poor youth, guiltless sufferer,
far from his home? 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS But lo! I see a servant of Hippolytus hasting
with troubled looks towards the palace.  (A MESSENGER enters.)

MESSENGER Ladies, where may I find Theseus, king of the country?
pray, tell me if ye know; is he within the palace here? 

LEADER Lo! himself approaches from the palace.  (THESEUS enters.)

MESSENGER Theseus, I am the bearer of troublous tidings to thee and
all citizens who dwell in Athens or the bounds of Troezen.

THESEUS How now? hath some strange calamity o'ertaken these two neighbouring
cities? 

MESSENGER In one brief word, Hippolytus is dead. 'Tis true one slender
thread still links him to the light of life. 

THESEUS Who slew him? Did some husband come to blows with him, one
whose wife, like mine, had suffered brutal violence? 

MESSENGER He perished through those steeds that drew his chariot
and through the curses thou didst utter, praying to thy sire, the
ocean-king, to slay thy son. 

THESEUS Ye gods and king Poseidon, thou hast proved my parentage
by hearkening to my prayer! Say how he perished; how fell the uplifted
hand of justice to smite the villain who dishonoured me?

MESSENGER Hard by the wave-beat shore were we combing out his horses'
manes, weeping the while, for one had come to say that Hippolytus
was harshly exiled by thee and nevermore would return to set foot
in this land. Then came he, telling the same doleful tale to us upon
the beach, and with him was a countless throng of friends who followed
after. At length he stayed his lamentation and spake: "Why weakly
rave on this wise? My father's commands must be obeyed. Ho! servants,
harness my horses to the chariot; this is no longer now city of mine."
Thereupon each one of us bestirred himself, and, ere a man could say
'twas done, we had the horses standing ready at our master's side.
Then he caught up the reins from the chariot-rail, first fitting his
feet exactly in the hollows made for them. But first with outspread
palms he called upon the gods, "O Zeus, now strike me dead, if I have
sinned, and let my father learn how he is wronging me, in death at
least, if not in life." Therewith he seized the whip and lashed each
horse in turn; while we, close by his chariot, near the reins, kept
up with him along the road that leads direct to Argos and Epidaurus.
And just as we were coming to a desert spot, a strip of sand beyond
the borders of this country, sloping right to the Saronic gulf, there
issued thence a deep rumbling sound, as it were an earthquake, fearsome
noise, and the horses reared their heads and pricked their ears, while
we were filled with wild alarm to know whence came the sound; when,
as we gazed toward the wave-beat shore, a wave tremendous we beheld
towering to the skies, so that from our view the cliffs of Sciron
vanished, for it hid the isthmus and the rock of Asclepius; then swelling
and frothing with a crest of foam, the sea discharged it toward the
beach where stood the harnessed car, and in the moment that it broke,
that mighty wall of waters, there issued from the wave a monstrous
bull, whose bellowing filled the land with fearsome echoes, a sight
too awful as it seemed to us who witnessed it. A panic seized the
horses there and then, but our master, to horses' ways quite used,
gripped in both hands his reins, and tying them to his body pulled
them backward as the sailor pulls his oar; but the horses gnashed
the forged bits between their teeth and bore him wildly on, regardless
of their master's guiding hand or rein or jointed car. And oft as
he would take the guiding rein and steer for softer ground, showed
that bull in front to turn him back again, maddening his team with
terror; but if in their frantic career they ran towards the rocks,
he would draw nigh the chariot-rail, keeping up with them, until,
suddenly dashing the wheel against a stone, he upset and wrecked the
car; then was dire confusion, axle-boxes and linchpins springing into
the air. While he, poor youth, entangled in the reins was dragged
along, bound by a stubborn knot, his poor head dashed against the
rocks, his flesh all torn, the while he cried out piteously, "Stay,
stay, my horses whom my own hand hath fed at the manger, destroy me
not utterly. O luckless curse of a father! Will no one come and save
me for all my virtue?" Now we, though much we longed to help, were
left far behind. At last, I know not how, he broke loose from the
shapely reins that bound him, a faint breath of life still in him;
but the horses disappeared, and that portentous bull, among the rocky
ground, I know not where. I am but a slave in thy house, 'tis true,
O king, yet will I never believe so monstrous a charge against thy
son's character, no! not though the whole race of womankind should
hang itself, or one should fill with writing every pine-tree tablet
grown on Ida, sure as I am of his uprightness. 

LEADER Alas! new troubles come to plague us, nor is there any escape
from fate and necessity. 

THESEUS My hatred for him who hath thus suffered made me glad at
thy tidings, yet from regard for the gods and him, because he is my
son, I feel neither joy nor sorrow at his sufferings. 

MESSENGER But say, are we to bring the victim hither, or how are
we to fulfil thy wishes? Bethink thee; if by me thou wilt be schooled,
thou wilt not harshly treat thy son in his sad plight. 

THESEUS Bring him hither, that when I see him face to face, who hath
denied having polluted my wife's honour, I may by words and heaven's
visitation convict him.  (The MESSENGER departs.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Ah! Cypris, thine the hand that guides the stubborn
hearts of gods and men; thine, and that attendant boy's, who, with
painted plumage gay, flutters round his victims on lightning wing.
O'er the land and booming deep on golden pinion borne flits the god
of Love, maddening the heart and beguiling the senses of all whom
he attacks, savage whelps on mountains bred, ocean's monsters, creatures
of this sun-warmed earth, and man; thine, O Cypris, thine alone the
sovereign power to rule them all.  (ARTEMIS appears above.)

ARTEMIS  (chanting) Hearken, I bid thee, noble son of Aegeus: lo!
'tis I, Latona's child, that speak, I, Artemis. Why, Theseus, to thy
sorrow dost thou rejoice at these tidings, seeing that thou hast slain
thy son most impiously, listening to a charge not clearly proved,
but falsely sworn to by thy wife? though clearly has the curse therefrom
upon thee fallen. Why dost thou not for very shame hide beneath the
dark places of the earth, or change thy human life and soar on wings
to escape this tribulation? 'Mongst men of honour thou hast now no
share in life.  (She now speaks.)  Hearken, Theseus; I will put thy
wretched case. Yet will it naught avail thee, if I do, but vex thy
heart; still with this intent I came, to show thy son's pure heart,-that
he may die with honour,-as well the frenzy and, in a sense, the nobleness
of thy wife; for she was cruelly stung with a passion for thy son
by that goddess whom all we, that joy in virgin purity, detest. And
though she strove to conquer love by resolution, yet by no fault of
hers she fell, thanks to her nurse's strategy, who did reveal her
malady unto thy son under oath. But he would none of her counsels,
as indeed was right, nor yet, when thou didst revile him, would he
break the oath he swore, from piety. She meantime, fearful of being
found out, wrote a lying letter, destroying by guile thy son, but
yet persuading thee. 

THESEUS Woe is me! 

ARTEMIS Doth my story wound thee, Theseus? Be still awhile; hear
what follows, so wilt thou have more cause to groan. Dost remember
those three prayers thy father granted thee, fraught with certain
issue? 'Tis one of these thou hast misused, unnatural wretch, against
thy son, instead of aiming it at an enemy. Thy sea-god sire, 'tis
true, for all his kind intent, hath granted that boon he was compelled,
by reason of his promise, to grant. But thou alike in his eyes and
in mine hast shewn thy evil heart, in that thou hast forestalled all
proof or voice prophetic, hast made no inquiry, nor taken time for
consideration, but with undue haste cursed thy son even to the death.

THESEUS Perdition seize me! Queen revered! 

ARTEMIS An awful deed was thine, but still even for this thou mayest
obtain pardon; for it was Cypris that would have it so, sating the
fury of her soul. For this is law amongst us gods; none of us will
thwart his neighbour's will, but ever we stand aloof. For be well
assured, did I not fear Zeus, never would I have incurred the bitter
shame of handing over to death a man of all his kind to me most dear.
As for thy sin, first thy ignorance absolves thee from its villainy,
next thy wife, who is dead, was lavish in her use of convincing arguments
to influence thy mind. On thee in chief this storm of woe hath burst,
yet is it some grief to me as well; for when the righteous die, there
is no joy in heaven, albeit we try to destroy the wicked, house and
home. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Lo! where he comes, this hapless youth, his fair
young flesh and auburn locks most shamefully handled. Unhappy house!
what two-fold sorrow doth o'ertake its halls, through heaven's ordinance!
(HIPPOLYTUS enters, assisted by his attendants.)  

HIPPOLYTUS  (chanting) Ah! ah! woe is me! foully undone by an impious
father's impious imprecation! Undone, undone! woe is me! Through my
head dart fearful pains; my brain throbs convulsively. Stop, let me
rest my worn-out frame. Oh, oh! Accursed steeds, that mine own hand
did feed, ye have been my ruin and my death. O by the gods, good sirs,
beseech ye, softly touch my wounded limbs. Who stands there at my
right side? Lift me tenderly; with slow and even step conduct a poor
wretch cursed by his mistaken sire. Great Zeus, dost thou see this?
Me thy reverent worshipper, me who left all men behind in purity,
plunged thus into yawning Hades 'neath the earth, reft of life; in
vain the toils I have endured through my piety towards mankind. Ah
me! ah me! O the thrill of anguish shooting through me! Set me down,
poor wretch I am; come Death to set me free! Kill me, end my sufferings.
O for a sword two-edged to hack my flesh, and close this mortal life!
Ill-fated curse of my father! the crimes of bloody kinsmen, ancestors
of old, now pass their boundaries and tarry not, and upon me are they
come all guiltless as I am; ah! why? Alas, alas! what can I say? How
from my life get rid of this relentless agony? O that the stern Death-god,
night's black visitant, would give my sufferings rest! 

ARTEMIS Poor sufferer! cruel the fate that links thee to it! Thy
noble soul hath been thy ruin. 

HIPPOLYTUS Ah! the fragrance from my goddess wafted! Even in my agony
I feel thee near and find relief; she is here in this very place,
my goddess Artemis. 

ARTEMIS She is, poor sufferer! the goddess thou hast loved the best.

HIPPOLYTUS Dost see me, mistress mine? dost see my present suffering?

ARTEMIS I see thee, but mine eyes no tear may weep. 

HIPPOLYTUS Thou hast none now to lead the hunt or tend thy fane.

ARTEMIS None now; yet e'en in death I love thee still. 

HIPPOLYTUS None to groom thy steeds, or guard thy shrines.

ARTEMIS 'Twas Cypris, mistress of iniquity, devised this evil.

HIPPOLYTUS Ah me! now know I the goddess who destroyed me.

ARTEMIS She was jealous of her slighted honour, vexed at thy chaste
life. 

HIPPOLYTUS Ah! then I see her single hand hath struck down three
of us. 

ARTEMIS Thy sire and thee, and last thy father's wife. 

HIPPOLYTUS My sire's ill-luck as well as mine I mourn. 

ARTEMIS He was deceived by a goddess's design. 

HIPPOLYTUS Woe is thee, my father, in this sad mischance!

THESEUS My son, I am a ruined man; life has no joys for me.

HIPPOLYTUS For this mistake I mourn thee rather than myself.

THESEUS O that I had died for thee, my son! 

HIPPOLYTUS Ah! those fatal gifts thy sire Poseidon gave.

THESEUS Would God these lips had never uttered that prayer!

HIPPOLYTUS Why not? thou wouldst in any case have slain me in thy
fury then. 

THESEUS Yes; Heaven had perverted my power to think. 

HIPPOLYTUS O that the race of men could bring a curse upon the gods!

ARTEMIS Enough! for though thou pass to gloom beneath the earth,
the wrath of Cypris shall not, at her will, fall on thee unrequited,
because thout hadst a noble righteous soul. For I with mine own hand
will with these unerring shafts avenge me on another, who is her votary,
dearest to her of all the sons of men. And to thee, poor sufferer,
for thy anguish now will grant high honours in the city of Troezen;
for thee shall maids unwed before their marriage cut off their hair,
thy harvest through the long roll of time of countless bitter tears.
Yea, and for ever shall the virgin choir hymn thy sad memory, nor
shall Phaedra's love for thee fall into oblivion and pass away unnoticed.
But thou, O son of old Aegeus, take thy son in thine arms, draw him
close to thee, for unwittingly thou slewest him, and men may well
commit an error when gods put it in their way. And thee Hippolytus,
I admonish; hate not thy sire, for in this death thou dost but meet
thy destined fate. And now farewell! 'tis not for me to gaze upon
the dead, or pollute my sight with death-scenes, and e'en now I see
thee nigh that evil.  (ARTEMIS vanishes.)  

HIPPOLYTUS Farewell, blest virgin queen! leave me now! Easily thou
resignest our long friendship! I am reconciled with my father at thy
desire, yea, for ever before I would obey thy bidding. Ah me! the
darkness is settling even now upon my eyes. Take me, father, in thy
arms, lift me up. 

THESEUS Woe is me, my son! what art thou doing to me thy hapless
sire! 

HIPPOLYTUS I am a broken man; yes, I see the gates that close upon
the dead. 

THESEUS Canst leave me thus with murder on my soul! 

HIPPOLYTUS No, no; I set thee free from this bloodguiltiness.

THESEUS What sayest thou? dost absolve me from bloodshed?

HIPPOLYTUS Artemis, the archer-queen, is my witness that I do.

THESEUS My own dear child, how generous dost thou show thyself to
thy father! 

HIPPOLYTUS Farewell, dear father! a long farewell to thee!

THESEUS O that holy, noble soul of thine! 

HIPPOLYTUS Pray to have children such as me born in lawful wedlock.

THESEUS O leave me not, my son; endure awhile. 

HIPPOLYTUS 'Tis finished, my endurance; I die, father; quickly veil
my face with a mantle. 

THESEUS O glorious Athens, realm of Pallas, what a splendid hero
ye have lost! Ah me, ah me! How oft shall I remember thy evil works,
P Cypris! 

CHORUS  (singing) On all our citizens hath come this universal sorrow,
unforeseen. Now shall the copious tear gush forth, for sad news about
great men takes more than usual hold upon the heart. 

THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the Temple of Apollo at Delphi. The sun is about to rise. MERCURY
enters.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

MERCURY Atlas, that on his brazen shoulders rolls 
Yon heaven, the ancient mansion of the gods, 
Was by a goddess sire to Maia; she 
To supreme Jove bore me, and call'd me Hermes; 
Attendant on the king, his high behests 
I execute. To Delphi am I come, 
This land where Phoebus from his central throne 
Utters to mortals his high strain, declaring 
The present and the future; this is the cause; 
Greece hath a city of distinguish'd glory, 
Which from the goddess of the golden lance 
Received its name; Erechtheus was its king; 
His daughter, call'd Creusa, to the embrace 
Of nuptial love Apollo strain'd perforce, 
Where northward points the rock beneath the heights 
Crown'd with the Athenian citadel of Pallas, 
Call'd Macrai by the lords of Attica. 
Her growing burden, to her sire unknown 
(Such was the pleasure of the god,) she bore, 
Till in her secret chamber to a son 
The rolling months gave birth: to the same cave, 
Where by the enamour'd god she was compress'd, 
Creusa bore the infant: there for death 
Exposed him in a well-compacted ark 
Of circular form, observant of the customs 
Drawn from her great progenitors, and chief 
From Erichthonius, who from the Attic earth 
Deriv'd his origin: to him as guards 
Minerva gave two dragons, and in charge 
Consign'd him to the daughters of Aglauros: 
This rite to the Erechthidae hence remains, 
Mid serpents wreathed in ductile gold to nurse 
Their children. What of ornament she had 
She hung around her son, and left him thus 
To perish. But to me his earnest prayer 
Phoebus applied, "To the high-lineaged sons 
Of glorious Athens go, my brother; well 
Thou know'st the city of Pallas; from the cave 
Deep in the hollow rock a new-born babe, 
Laid as he is, and all his vestments with him; 
Bring to thy brother to my shrine, and place 
At the entrance of my temple; of the rest 
(For, know, the child is mine) I will take care." 
To gratify my brother thence I bore 
The osier-woven ark, and placed the boy 
Here at the temple's base, the wreathed lid 
Uncovering, that the infant might be seen. 
It chanced, as the orient sun the steep of heav'n 
Ascended, to the god's oracular seat 
The priestess entering, on the infant cast 
Her eye, and marvelled, deeming that some nymph 
Of Delphi at the fane had dared to lay 
The secret burden of her womb: this thought 
Prompts her to move it from the shrine: but soon 
To pity she resign'd the harsh intent; 
The impulse of the god secretly acting 
In favour of the child, that in his temple 
It might abide; her gentle hand then took it, 
And gave it nurture; yet conceived she not 
That Phoebus was the sire, nor who the mother 
Knew aught, nor of his parents could the child 
Give information. All his youthful years 
Sportive he wandered round the shrine, and there 
Was fed: but when his firmer age advanced 
To manhood, o'er the treasures of the god 
The Delphians placed him, to his faithful care 
Consigning all; and in this royal dome 
His hallow'd life he to this hour hath pass'd. 
Meantime Creusa, mother of the child, 
To Xuthus was espoused, the occasion this:- 
On Athens from Euboean Chalcis roll'd 
The waves of war; be join'd their martial toil, 
And with his spear repell'd the foe; for this 
To the proud honour of Creusa's bed 
Advanc'd; no native, in Achaea sprung 
From Aeolus, the son of Jove. Long time 
Unbless'd with children, to the oracular shrine 
Of Phoebus are they come, through fond desire 
Of progeny: to this the god hath brought 
The fortune of his son, nor, as was deem'd, 
Forgets him; but to Xuthus, when he stands 
This sacred seat consulting, will he give 
That son, declared his offspring; that the child, 
When to Creusa's house brought back, by her 
May be agnized; the bridal rites of Phoebus 
Kept secret, that the youth may claim the state 
Due to his birth, through all the states of Greece 
Named Ion, founder of the colonies 
On the Asiatic coast. The laurell'd cave 
Now will I visit, there to learn what fortune 
Is to the boy appointed, for I see 
This son of Phoebus issuing forth to adorn 
The gates before the shrine with laurel boughs. 
First of the gods I hail him by the name 
Of Ion, which his fortune soon will give him.  (MERCURY vanishes.
ION and the attendants of the temple enter.)  

ION  (chanting) Now flames this radiant chariot of the sun

High o'er the earth, at whose ethereal fire 
The stars into the sacred night retreat: 
O'er the Parnassian cliffs the ascending wheels 
To mortals roll the beams of day; the wreaths 
Of incense-breathing myrrh mount to the roof 
Of Phoebus' fane; the Delphic priestess now 
Assumes her seat, and from the hallow'd tripod 
Pronounces to the Greeks the oracular strains 
Which the god dictates. Haste, ye Delphic train, 
Haste to Castalia's silver-streaming fount; 
Bathed in its chaste dews to the temple go; 
There from your guarded mouths no sound be heard 
But of good omen, that to those who crave 
Admission to the oracle, your voice 
May with auspicious words expound the answers. 
My task, which from my early infancy 
Hath been my charge, shall be with laurel boughs 
And sacred wreaths to cleanse the vestibule 
Of Phoebus, on the pavement moistening dews 
To rain, and with my bow to chase the birds 
Which would defile the hallow'd ornaments. 
A mother's fondness, and a father's care 
I never knew: the temple of the god 
Claims then my service, for it nurtured me.  (The attendants leave.
ION busies himself before the temple as he continues to sing., strophe)

Haste, thou verdant new-sprung bough, 
Haste, thy early office know; 
Branch of beauteous laurel come, 
Sweep Apollo's sacred dome, 
Cropp'd this temple's base beneath, 
Where the immortal gardens breathe, 
And eternal dews that round 
Water the delicious ground, 
Bathe the myrtle's tresses fair. 
Lightly thus, with constant care, 
The pavement of the god I sweep, 
When over the Parnassian steep 
Flames the bright sun's mounting ray; 
This my task each rising day. 
Son of Latona, Paean, Paean, hail! 
Never, O never may thy honours fail! 

(antistrophe)

Grateful is my task, who wait 
Serving, Phoebus, at thy gate; 
Honouring thus thy hallow'd shrine, 
Honour for the task is mine. 
Labouring with unwilling hands, 
Me no mortal man commands: 
But, immortal gods, to you 
All my pleasing toil is due. 
Phoebus is to me a sire; 
Grateful thoughts my soul inspire; 
Nurtured by thy bounty here, 
Thee, Apollo, I revere; 
As a father's I repeat. 
Son of Latona, Paean, Paean, hail! 
Never, O never may thy honours fail! 

Now from this labour with the laurel bough 
I cease; and sprinkling from the golden vase 
The chaste drops which Castalia's fountain rolls, 
Bedew the pavement. Never may I quit 
This office to the god; or, if I quit it, 
Be it, good Fortune, at thy favouring call! 
But see, the early birds have left their nests, 
And this way from Parnassus wing their flight. 
Come not, I charge you, near the battlements, 
Nor near the golden dome. Herald of Jove, 
Strong though thy beak beyond the feather'd kind, 
My bow shall reach thee. Towards the altar, see, 
A swan comes sailing: elsewhere wilt thou move 
Thy scarlet-tinctured foot? or from my bow 
The lyre of Phoebus to thy notes attuned 
Will not protect thee; farther stretch thy wings; 
Go, wanton, skim along the Delian lake, 
Or wilt thou steep thy melody in blood. 
Look, what strange bird comes onwards; wouldst thou fix 
Beneath the battlements thy straw-built nest? 
My singing bow shall drive thee hence; begone, 
Or to the banks of Alpheus, gulfy stream, 
Or to the Isthmian grove; there hatch thy young; 
Mar not these pendent ornaments, nor soil 
The temple of the god: I would not kill you: 
'Twere pity, for to mortal man you bear 
The message of the gods; yet my due task 
Must be perform'd, and never will I cease 
My service to the god who nurtured me.  (The CHORUS enters. The following
lines between ION and the CHORUS are chanted responsively as they
gaze admiringly at the decorations on the temple.)  

CHORUS The stately column, and the gorgeous dome 
Raised to the gods, are not the boast alone 
Of our magnificent Athens; nor the statues 
That grace her streets; this temple of the god, 
Son of Latona, beauteous to behold, 
Beams the resplendent light of both her children. 

ION Turn thine eyes this way; look, the son of Jove 
Lops with his golden scimitar the heads 
Of the Lernean Hydra: view it well. 

CHORUS I see him. 

ION And this other standing nigh, 
Who snatches from the fire the blazing brand. 

CHORUS What is his name? the subject, on the web 
Design'd, these hands have wrought in ductile gold. 

ION The shield-supporting Iolaus, who bears 
The toils in common with the son of Jove. 
View now this hero; on his winged steed 
The triple-bodied monster's dreadful force 
He conquers through the flames his jaws emit. 

CHORUS I view it all attentively. 

ION Observe 
The battle of the giants, on the walls 
Sculptured in stone. 

CHORUS Let us note this, my friends. 

ION See where against Enceladus she shakes 
Her gorgon shield. 

CHORUS I see my goddess, Pallas. 

ION Mark the tempestuous thunder's flaming bolt 
Launch'd by the hand of Jove. 

CHORUS The furious Mimas 
Here blazes in the volley'd fires: and there 
Another earth-born monster falls beneath 
The wand of Bacchus wreathed with ivy round, 
No martial spear. But, as 'tis thine to tend 
This temple, let me ask thee, is it lawful, 
Leaving our sandals, its interior parts 
To visit? 

ION Strangers, this is not permitted. 

CHORUS Yet may we make inquiries of thee? 

ION Speak; 
What wouldst thou know? 

CHORUS Whether this temple's site 
Be the earth's centre? 

ION Ay, with garlands hung, 
And gorgons all around. 

CHORUS So fame reports. 

ION If at the gate the honey'd cake be offer'd, 
Would you consult the oracle, advance 
To the altar: till the hallow'd lamb has bled 
In sacrifice, approach not the recess. 

CHORUS I am instructed: what the god appoints 
As laws, we wish not to transgress: without 
Enough of ornament delights our eyes. 

ION Take a full view of all; that is allow'd. 

CHORUS To view the inmost shrine was our lord's order. 

ION Who are you call'd? Attendants on what house? 

CHORUS Our lords inhabit the magnific domes 
Of Pallas.-But she comes, of whom thou askest.  (CREUSA and attendants
enter.)  

ION Lady, whoe'er thou art, that liberal air 
Speaks an exalted mind: there is a grace, 
A dignity in those of noble birth, 
That marks their high rank. Yet I marvel much 
That from thy closed lids the trickling tear 
Water'd thy beauteous cheeks, soon as thine eye 
Beheld this chaste oracular seat of Phoebus. 
What brings this sorrow, lady? All besides, 
Viewing the temple of the god, are struck 
With joy; thy melting eye o'erflows with tears. 

CREUSA Not without reason, stranger, art thou seized 
With wonder at my tears: this sacred dome 
Awakes the sad remembrance of things past. 
I had my mind at home, though present here. 
How wretched is our sex! And, O ye gods, 
What deeds are yours! Where may we hope for right, 
If by the injustice of your power undone? 

ION Why, lady, this inexplicable grief? 

CREUSA It matters not; my mind resumes its firmless: 
I say no more; cease thy concern for me. 

ION But say, who art thou? whence? what country boasts 
Thy birth? and by what name may we address thee? 

CREUSA Creusa is my name, drawn from Erechtheus 
My high-born lineage; Athens gave me birth. 
Illustrious is thy state; thy ancestry 
So noble that I look with reverence on thee. 

CREUSA Happy indeed is this, in nothing farther. 

ION But tell me, is it true what fame has blazon'd? 

CREUSA What wouldst thou ask? Stranger, I wish to know.

ION Sprung the first author of thy line from the earth?

CREUSA Ay, Erichthonius; but my race avails not. 

ION And did Minerva raise him from the earth? 

CREUSA Held in her virgin hands: she bore him not. 

ION And gave him as the picture represents? 

CREUSA Daughters of Cecrops these, charged not to see him.

ION The virgins ope'd the interdicted chest? 

CREUSA And died, distaining with their blood the rock. 

ION But tell me, is this truth, or a vain rumour? 

CREUSA What wouldst thou ask? I am not scant of time. 

ION Thy sisters did Erechtheus sacrifice? 

CREUSA He slew the virgins, victims for their country. 

ION And thou of all thy sisters saved alone? 

CREUSA I was an infant in my mother's arms. 

ION And did the yawning earth swallow thy father? 

CREUSA By Neptune's trident smote; and so he perish'd. 

ION And Macrai call you not the fatal place? 

CREUSA Why dost thou ask? What thoughts hast thou recall'd?,

ION Does Phoebus, do his lightnings honour it? 

CREUSA Honour! Why this? Would I had never seen it! 

ION Why? Dost thou hate the place dear to the god? 

CREUSA No: but for some base deed done in the cave. 

ION But what Athenian, lady, wedded thee? 

CREUSA Of Athens none, but one of foreign birth. 

ION What is his name? Noble he needs must be. 

CREUSA Xuthus, by Aeolus derived from Jove. 

ION How weds a stranger an Athenian born? 

CREUSA Euboea is a state neighbouring on Athens. 

ION A narrow sea flows, I have heard, between. 

CREUSA Joining the Athenian arms, that state he wasted.

ION Confederate in the war, thence wedded thee? 

CREUSA The dowral meed of war, earn'd by his spear. 

ION Comest thou with him to Delphi, or alone? 

CREUSA With him, gone now to the Trophonian shrine. 

ION To view it, or consult the oracle? 

CREUSA Both that and this, anxious for one response. 

ION For the earth's fruits consult you, or for children?

CREUSA Though wedded long, yet childless is our bed. 

ION Hast thou ne'er borne a child, that thou hast none?

CREUSA My state devoid of children Phoebus knows. 

ION Bless'd in all else, luckless in this alone. 

CREUSA But who art thou? Bless'd I pronounce thy mother.

ION Call'd as I am the servant of the god. 

CREUSA Presented by some state, or sold to this? 

ION I know not aught save this, I am the god's. 

CREUSA And in my turn, stranger, I pity thee. 

ION As knowing not my mother, or my lineage. 

CREUSA Hast thou thy dwelling here, or in some house? 

ION The temple is my house, ev'n when I sleep. 

CREUSA A child brought hither, or in riper years? 

ION An infant, as they say, who seem to know. 

CREUSA What Delphian dame sustain'd thee at her breast?

ION I never knew a breast. She nourish'd me. 

CREUSA Who, hapless youth? Diseased, I find disease. 

ION The priestess: as a mother I esteem her. 

CREUSA Who to these manly years gave thee support? 

ION The altars, and the still-succeeding strangers. 

CREUSA Wretched, whoe'er she be, is she that bore thee.

ION I to some woman am perchance a shame. 

CREUSA Are riches thine? Thou art well habited. 

ION Graced with these vestments by the god I serve. 

CREUSA Hast thou made no attempt to trace thy birth? 

ION I have no token, lady, for a proof. 

CREUSA Ah, like thy mother doth another suffer. 

ION Who? tell me: shouldst thou help me, what a joy 

CREUSA One for whose sake I come before my husband. 

ION Say for what end, that I may serve thee, lady. 

CREUSA To ask a secret answer of the god. 

ION Speak it: my service shall procure the rest. 

CREUSA Hear then the tale: but Modesty restrains me. 

ION Ah, let her not; her power avails not here. 

CREUSA My friend then says that to the embrace of Phoebus-

ION A woman and a god! Say not so, stranger. 

CREUSA She bore a son: her father knew it not. 

ION Not so: a mortal's baseness he disdains. 

CREUSA This she affirms; and this, poor wretch, she suffer'd.

ION What follow'd, if she knew the god's embrace? 

CREUSA The child, which hence had birth, she straight exposed.

ION This exposed child, where is he? doth he live? 

CREUSA This no one knows; this wish I to inquire. 

ION If not alive, how probably destroyed? 

CREUSA Torn, she conjectures, by some beast of prey. 

ION What ground hath she on which to build that thought?

CREUSA Returning to the place she found him not. 

ION Observed she drops of blood distain the path? 

CREUSA None, though with anxious heed she search'd around.

ION What time hath pass'd since thus the child was lost?

CREUSA Were he alive, his youth were such as thine. 

ION The god hath done him wrong: the unhappy mother- 

CREUSA Hath not to any child been mother since. 

ION What if in secret Phoebus nurtures him! 

CREUSA Unjust to enjoy alone a common right. 

ION Ah me! this cruel fate accords with mine. 

CREUSA For thee too thy unhappy mother mourns. 

ION Ah, melt me not to griefs I would forget! 

CREUSA I will be silent: but impart thy aid. 

ION Seest thou what most the inquiry will suppress? 

CREUSA And to my wretched friend what is not ill? 

ION How shall the god what he would hide reveal? 

CREUSA As placed on the oracular seat of Greece. 

ION The deed must cause him shame: convict him not. 

CREUSA To the poor sufferer 'tis the cause of grief. 

ION It cannot be; for who shall dare to give 
The oracle? With justice would the god, 
In his own dome affronted, pour on him 
Severest vengeance, who should answer thee. 
Desist then, lady: it becomes us ill, 
In opposition to the god, to make 
Inquiries at his shrine; by sacrifice 
Before their altars, or the flight of birds, 
Should we attempt to force the unwilling gods 
To utter what they wish not, 'twere the excess 
Of rudeness; what with violence we urge 
'Gainst their consent would to no good avail us: 
What their spontaneous grace confers on us, 
That, lady, as a blessing we esteem. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS How numberless the ills to mortal man,

And various in their form! One single blessing 
By any one through life is scarcely found. 

CREUSA Nor here, nor there, O Phoebus, art thou just 
To her; though absent, yet her words are present. 
Nor didst thou save thy son, whom it became thee 
To save; nor, though a prophet, wilt thou speak 
To the sad mother who inquires of thee; 
That, if he is no more, to him a tomb 
May rise; but, if he lives, that he may bless 
His mother's eyes. But even thus behooves us 
To omit these things, if by the god denied 
To know what most I wish.-But, for I see 
The noble Xuthus this way bend, return'd 
From the Trophonian cave; before my husband 
Resume not, generous stranger, this discourse, 
Lest it might cause me shame that thus I act 
In secret, and perchance lead on to questions 
I would not have explain'd. Our hapless sex 
Oft feel our husbands' rigour: with the bad 
The virtuous they confound, and treat us harshly.  (XUTHUS and his
retinue enter.)  

XUTHUS With reverence to the god my first address 
I pay: Hail, Phoebus! Lady, next to thee: 
Absent so long, have I not caused thee fear? 

CREUSA Not much: as anxious thoughts 'gan rise, thou'rt come.

But, tell me, from Trophonius what reply 
Bearest thou; what means whence offspring may arise? 

XUTHUS Unmeet he held it to anticipate 
The answer of the god: one thing he told me. 
That childless I should not return, nor thou, 
Home from the oracle. 

CREUSA Goddess revered, 
Mother of Phoebus, be our coming hither 
In lucky hour; and our connubial bed 
Be by thy son made happier than before! 

XUTHUS It shall be so. But who is president here? 

ION Without, that charge is mine; within, devolved 
On others, stranger, seated near the tripod; 
The chiefs of Delphi these, chosen by lot. 

XUTHUS 'Tis well: all that I want is then complete. 
Let me now enter: for the oracle 
Is given, I hear, in common to all strangers 
Before the shrine; on such a day, that falls 
Propitious thus, the answer of the god 
Would I receive: meanwhile, these laurel boughs 
Bear round the altars; lady, breathe thy prayers 
To every god, that from Apollo's shrine 
I may bring back the promise of a son.  (XUTHUS, after giving the
laurel boughs to CREUSA, enters the temple.)  

CREUSA It shall, it shall be so. Should Phoebus now 
At least be willing to redress the fault 
Of former times, he would not through the whole 
Be friendly to us: yet will I accept 
What he vouchsafes us, for he is a god.  (CREUSA departs to the shrines
in the outer precinct of the temple.)  

ION Why does this stranger always thus revile 
With obscure speech the god? Is it through love 
Of her, for whom she asks? or to conceal 
Some secret of importance? But to me 
What is the daughter of Erechtheus? Naught 
Concerns it me. Then let me to my task, 
And sprinkle from the golden vase the dew. 
Yet must I blame the god, if thus perforce 
He mounts the bed of virgins, and by stealth 
Becomes a father, leaving then his children 
To die, regardless of them. Do not thou 
Act thus; but, as thy power is great, respect 
The virtues; for whoe'er, of mortal men, 
Dares impious deeds, him the gods punish: how 
Is it then just that you, who gave the laws 
To mortals, should yourselves transgress those laws?, 
If (though it is not thus, yet will I urge 
The subject,)-if to mortals you shall pay 
The penalty of forced embraces, thou, 
Neptune, and Jove, that reigns supreme in heaven, 
Will leave your temples treasureless by paying 
The mulcts of your injustice: for unjust 
You are, your pleasures to grave temperance 
Preferring: and to men these deeds no more 
Can it be just to charge as crimes, these deeds 
If from the gods they imitate: on those 
Who gave the ill examples falls the charge.  (ION goes out.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Thee prompt to yield thy lenient aid, 
And sooth a mother's pain: 
And thee, my Pallas, martial maid, 
I call: O, hear the strain! 
Thou, whom the Titan from the head of Jove, 
Prometheus, drew, bright Victory, come, 
Descending from thy golden throne above; 
Haste, goddess, to the Pythian dome, 
Where Phoebus, from his central shrine, 
Gives the oracle divine, 
By the raving maid repeated, 
On the hallow'd tripod seated: 
O haste thee, goddess, and with thee 
The daughter of Latona bring; 
A virgin thou, a virgin she, 
Sisters to the Delphian king; 
Him, virgins, let your vows implore, 
That now his pure oracular power 
Will to Erechtheus' ancient line declare 
The blessing of a long-expected heir! 

(antistrophe)

To mortal man this promised grace 
Sublimest pleasure brings, 
When round the father's hearth a race 
In blooming lustre springs. 
The wealth, the honours, from their high-drawn line 
From sire to son transmitted down, 
Shall with fresh glory through their offspring shine, 
And brighten with increased renown: 
A guard, when ills begin to lower, 
Dear in fortune's happier hour; 
For their country's safety waking, 
Firm in fight the strong spear shaking; 
More than proud wealth's exhaustless store, 
More than a monarch's bride to reign, 
The dear delight, to virtue's lore 
Careful the infant mind to train. 
Doth any praise the childless state? 
The joyless, loveless life I hate; 
No; my desires to moderate wealth I bound, 
But let me see my children smile around. 

(epode)

Ye rustic seats, Pan's dear delight; 
Ye caves of Macrai's rocky height, 
Where oft the social virgins meet, 
And weave the dance with nimble feet; 
Descendants from Aglauros they 
In the third line, with festive play, 
Minerva's hallow'd fane before 
The verdant plain light-tripping o'er, 
When thy pipe's quick-varying sound 
Rings, O Pan, these caves around; 
Where, by Apollo's love betray'd, 
Her child some hapless mother laid, 
Exposed to each night-prowling beast, 
Or to the ravenous birds a feast; 
For never have I heard it told, 
Nor wrought it in historic gold, 
That happiness attends the race, 
When gods with mortals mix the embrace.  (ION re-enters.)

ION Ye female train, that place yourselves around 
This incense-breathing temple's base, your lord 
Awaiting, hath he left the sacred tripod 
And oracle, or stays he in the shrine, 
Making inquiries of his childless state? 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Yet in the temple, stranger, he remains.

ION But he comes forth; the sounding doors announce 
His near approach; behold, our lord is here.  (XUTHUS enters from
the temple. He rushes to greet ION.)  

XUTHUS Health to my son! This first address is proper. 

ION I have my health: be in thy senses thou, 
And both are well. 

XUTHUS O let me kiss thy hand, 
And throw mine arms around thee. 

ION Art thou, stranger, 
Well in thy wits? or hath the god's displeasure 
Bereft thee of thy reason? 

XUTHUS Reason bids, 
That which is dearest being found, to wish 
A fond embrace. 

ION Off, touch me not; thy hands 
Will mar the garlands of the god. 

XUTHUS My touch 
Asserts no pledge: my own, and that most dear, 
I find. 

ION Wilt thou not keep thee distant, ere 
Thou hast my arrow in thy heart? 

XUTHUS Why fly me, 
When thou shouldst own what is most fond of thee? 

ION I am not fond of curing wayward strangers, 
And madmen. 

XUTHUS Kill me, raise my funeral pyre; 
But, if thou kill me, thou wilt kill thy father. 

ION My father thou! how so? it makes me laugh 
To hear thee. 

XUTHUS This my words may soon explain. 

ION What wilt thou say to me? 

XUTHUS I am thy father, 
And thou my son. 

ION Who declares this? 

XUTHUS The god, 
That nurtured thee, though mine. 

ION Thou to thyself 
Art witness. 

XUTHUS By the oracle inform'd. 

ION Misled by some dark answer. 

XUTHUS Well I heard it. 

ION What were the words of Phoebus? 

XUTHUS That who first 
Should meet me- 

ION How?-what meeting? 

XUTHUS As I pass'd. 
Forth from the temple. 

ION What the event to him? 

XUTHUS He is my son. 

ION Born so, or by some other 
Presented? 

XUTHUS Though a present, born my son. 

ION And didst thou first meet me? 

XUTHUS None else, my son. 

ION This fortune whence? 

XUTHUS At that we marvel both. 

ION Who is my mother? 

XUTHUS That I cannot say. 

ION Did not the god inform thee? 

XUTHUS Through my joy, 
For this I ask'd not. 

ION Haply from the earth 
I sprung, my mother. 

XUTHUS No, the earth no sons 
Produces. 

ION How then am I thine? 

XUTHUS I know not. 
To Phoebus I appeal. 

ION Be this discourse 
Chang'd to some other. 

XUTHUS This delights me most. 

ION Hast thou e'er mounted an unlawful bed? 

XUTHUS In foolishness of youth. 

ION Was that before 
Thy marriage with the daughter of Erechtheus? 

XUTHUS Since never. 

ION Owe I then my birth to that? 

XUTHUS The time agrees. 

ION How came I hither then? 

XUTHUS I can form no conjecture. 

ION Was I brought 
From some far distant part? 

XUTHUS That fills my mind 
With doubtful musing. 

ION Didst thou e'er before 
Visit the Pythian rock? 

XUTHUS Once, at the feast 
Of Bacchus. 

ION By some public host received? 

XUTHUS Who with the Delphian damsels- 

ION To the orgies 
Led thee, or how? 

XUTHUS And with the Maenades 
Of Bacchus- 

ION In the temperate hour, or warm 
With wine? 

XUTHUS Amid the revels of the god. 

ION From thence I date my birth. 

XUTHUS And fate, my son, 
Hath found thee. 

ION How then came I to the temple? 

XUTHUS Perchance exposed. 

ION The state of servitude 
Have I escaped. 

XUTHUS Thy father now, my son, 
Receive. 

ION Indecent were it in the god 
Not to confide. 

XUTHUS Thy thoughts are just. 

ION What else 
Would we? 

XUTHUS Thou seest what thou oughtst to see. 

ION Am I the son then of the son of Jove? 

XUTHUS Such is thy fortune. 

ION Those that gave me birth 
Do I embrace? 

XUTHUS Obedient to the god. 

ION My father, hail! 

XUTHUS That dear name I accept 
With joy. 

ION This present day- 

XUTHUS Hath made me happy. 

ION O my dear mother, when shall I behold 
Thy face? Whoe'er thou art, more wish I now 
To see thee than before; but thou perchance 
Art dead, and nothing our desires avail. 

LEADER We in the blessing of our house rejoice. 
Yet wish we that our mistress too were happy 
In children, and the lineage of Erechtheus. 

XUTHUS Well hath the god accomplish'd this, my son, 
Discovering thee, well hath he joined thee to me; 
And thou hast found the most endearing ties, 
To which, before this hour, thou wast a stranger. 
And the warm wish, which thou hast well conceived, 
Is likewise mine, that thou mayst find thy mother; 
I from what woman thou derivest thy birth. 
This, left to time, may haply be discover'd. 
Now quit this hallow'd earth, the god no more 
Attending, and to mine accord thy mind, 
To visit Athens, where thy father's sceptre, 
No mean one, waits thee, and abundant wealth: 
Nor, though thou grieve one parent yet unknown, 
Shalt thou be censured as ignobly born, 
Or poor: no, thou art noble, and thy state 
Adorn'd with rich possessions. Thou art silent. 
Why is thine eye thus fixed upon the ground? 
Why on thy brow that cloud? The smile of joy 
Vanish'd, thou strikest thy father's heart with fear. 

ION Far other things appear when nigh, than seen 
At distance. I indeed embrace my fortune, 
In thee my father found. But hear what now 
Wakes sad reflections. Proud of their high race 
Are your Athenians, natives of the land, 
Not drawn from foreign lineage: I to them 
Shall come unwelcome, in two points defective, 
My father not a native, and myself 
Of spurious birth: loaded with this reproach, 
If destitute of power, I shall be held 
Abject and worthless: should I rush among 
The highest order of the state, and wish 
To appear important, inferior ranks 
Will hate me; aught above them gives disgust. 
The good, the wise, men form'd to serve the state, 
Are silent, nor at public honours aim 
Too hastily: by such, were I not quiet 
In such a bustling state, I should be deem'd 
Ridiculous, and proverb'd for a fool. 
Should I attain the dignity of those, 
Whose approved worth hath raised them to the height 
Of public honours, by such suffrage more 
Should I be watch'd; for they that hold in states 
Rule and pre-eminence, bear hostile minds 
To all that vie with them. And should I come 
To a strange house a stranger, to a woman 
Childless herself, who that misfortune shared 
Before with thee, now sees it her sole lot, 
And feels it bitterly, would she not hate me, 
And that with justice? When I stand before them. 
With what an eye would she, who hath no child, 
Look on thy child? In tenderness to her, 
Thy wife, thou must forsake me, or embroil 
Thy house in discord, if thou favour me. 
What murderous means, what poisonous drugs for men 
Have women with inventive rage prepared! 
Besides, I have much pity for thy wife, 
Now growing old without a child, that grief 
Unmerited, the last of her high race, 
The exterior face indeed of royalty, 
So causelessly commended, bath its brightness; 
Within, all gloom: for what sweet peace of mind, 
What happiness is his, whose years are pass'd 
In comfortless suspicion, and the dread 
Of violence? Be mine the humble blessings 
Of private life, rather than be a king, 
From the flagitious forced to choose my friends, 
And hate the virtuous through the fear of death. 
Gold, thou mayst tell me, hath o'er things like these 
A sovereign power, and riches give delight: 
I have no pleasure in this noisy pomp, 
Nor, while I guard my riches, in the toil: 
Be mine a modest mean that knows not care. 
And now, my father, hear the happy state 
I here enjoy'd; and first, to mortal man 
That dearest blessing, leisure, and no bustle 
To cause disturbance: me no ruffian force 
Shoved from the way: it is not to be borne, 
When every insolent and worthless wretch 
Makes you give place. The worship of the god 
Employ'd my life, or (no unpleasing task) 
Service to men well pleased: the parting guest 
I bade farewell-welcomed the new-arrived. 
Thus something always new made every hour 
Glide sweetly on; and to the human mind 
That dearest wish, though some regard it not, 
To be, what duty and my nature made me, 
Just to the god: revolving this, my father, 
I wish not for thy Athens to exchange 
This state; permit me to myself to live; 
Dear to the mind pleasures that arise 
From humble life, as those which greatness brings. 

LEADER Well hast thou said, if those whom my soul holds

Most dear shall in thy words find happiness. 

XUTHUS No more of this discourse; learn to be happy. 
It is my will that thou begin it here, 
Where first I found thee, son: a general feast 
Will I provide, and make a sacrifice, 
Which at thy birth I made not: at my table 
Will I receive thee as a welcome guest, 
And cheer thee with the banquet, then conduct the 
To Athens with me as a visitant, 
Not as my son: for, mid my happiness, 
I would not grieve my wife, who hath no child. 

ION But I will watch the occasions time may bring, 
And so present thee, and obtain her leave 
That thou mayst hold the sceptre which I bear. 
Ion I name thee, as befits thy fortune, 
As first thou met'st me from the hallow'd shrine 
As I came forth; assemble then thy friends, 
Invite them all to share the joyful feast, 
Since thou art soon to leave the Delphic state. 
And you, ye females, keep, I charge you, keep 
This secret; she that tells my wife shall die. 

ION Let us then go; yet one thing to my fortune 
Is wanting: if I find not her that bore me, 
Life hath no joy. Might I indulge a wish, 
It were to find her an Athenian dame, 
That from my mother I might dare to assume 
Some confidence; for he whose fortune leads him 
To a free state proud of their unmix'd race, 
Though call'd a citizen, must close his lips 
With servile awe, for freedom is not his.  (XUTHUS and ION go out.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Yes, sisters, yes, the streaming eye, 
The swelling heart I see, the bursting sigh, 
When thus rejoicing in his son 
Our queen her royal lord shall find, 
And give to grief her anguish'd mind, 
Afflicted, childless, and alone. 
What means this voice divine, 
Son of Latona, fate-declaring power? 
Whence is this youth, so fondly graced, 
That to ripe manhood, from his infant hour, 
Hath in thy hallow'd courts been plac'd 
And nurtured at thy shrine? 
Thy dark reply delights not me; 
Lurking beneath close fraud I see: 
Where will this end? I fear, I fear- 
'Tis strange, and strange events must hence ensue: 
But grateful sounds it to his ear, 
The youth, that in another's state 
(Who sees not that my words are true?) 
Enjoys the fraud, and triumphs in his fate. 

(antistrophe)

Say, sisters, say, with duteous zeal 
Shall we this secret to our queen reveal? 
She, to her royal lord resign'd, 
With equal hope, with equal care, 
Form'd her his joys, his griefs to share, 
And gave him an her willing mind. 
But joys are his alone; 
While she, poor mourner, with a weight of woes, 
To hoary age advancing, bends; 
He the bright smile of prosperous fortune knows. 
Ev'n thus, unhonour'd by his friends, 
Plac'd on another's throne, 
Mischance and ruin on him wait, 
Who fails to guard its happy state. 
Him may mischance and ruin seize, 
Who round my lov'd queen spreads his wily trains. 
No god may his oblation please, 
No favouring flame to him ascend! 
To her my faith, my zeal remains, 
Known to her ancient royal house a friend. 

(epode)

Now the father and the new-found son 
The festive table haste to spread, 
Where to the skies Parnassus lifts his head, 
And deep beneath the hanging stone 
Forms in its rudely-rifted side 
A cavern wild and wide; 
Where Bacchus, shaking high his midnight flames, 
In many a light fantastic round 
Dances o'er the craggy ground, 
And revels with his frantic dames. 
Ne'er to my city let him come, 
This youth: no, rather let him die, 
And sink into an early tomb! 
With an indignant eye 
Athens would view the stranger's pride 
Within her gates triumphant ride: 
Enough for her the honour'd race that springs 
From old Erechtheus and her line of kings.  (CREUSA and her aged TUTOR
enter.)  

CREUSA Thou venerable man, whose guiding voice 
My father, while he lived, revered, advance 
Up to the oracular seat thy aged steps; 
That, if the royal Phoebus should pronounce 
Promise of offspring, thou with me mayst share 
The joy; for pleasing is it when with friends 
Good fortune we receive; if aught of ill 
(Avert it, Heaven!) befalls, a friend's kind eye 
Beams comfort; thee, as once thou didst revere 
My father, though thy queen, I now revere. 

TUTOR In thee, my child, the nobleness of manners 
Which graced thy royal ancestors yet lives; 
Thou never wilt disgrace thy high-born lineage. 
Lead me, then, lead me to the shrine, support me: 
High is the oracular seat, and steep the ascent; 
Be thou assistant to the foot of age. 

CREUSA Follow; be heedful where thou set thy steps. 

TUTOR I am: my foot is slow, my heart hath wings. 

CREUSA Fix thy staff firm on this loose-rolling ground.

TUTOR That hath no eyes; and dim indeed my sight. 

CREUSA Well hast thou said; on cheerful then, and faint not.

TUTOR I have the will, but o'er constraint no power. 

CREUSA Ye females, on my richly-broider'd works 
Faithful attendants, say, respecting children, 
For which we came, what fortune hath my lord 
Borne hence? if good, declare it: you shall find 
That to no thankless masters you give joy. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS O fortune! 

CREUSA To thy speech this is a proem 
Not tuned to happiness. 

LEADER Unhappy fortune! 
But why distress me for the oracle 
Given to our lords? Be that as fate requires 
In things which threaten death, what shall we do? 

CREUSA What means this strain of woe? Whence are these fears?

LEADER What! shall we speak, or bury this in silence? 

CREUSA Speak, though thy words bring wretchedness to me.

LEADER It shall be spoken, were I twice to die. 
To thee, my queen, it is not given to clasp 
In thy fond arms a child, or at thy breast 
To hold it. 

TUTOR O my child, would I were dead! 

CREUSA Yes, this is wretchedness indeed, a grief 
That makes life joyless. 

TUTOR This is ruin to us. 

CREUSA Unhappy me! this is a piercing grief, 
That rends my heart with anguish. 

TUTOR Groan not yet. 

CREUSA Yet is the affliction present. 

TUTOR Till we learn- 

CREUSA To me what tidings? 

TUTOR If a common fate 
Await our lord, partaker of thy griefs, 
Or thou alone art thus unfortunate. 

LEADER To him, old man, the god hath given a son, 
And happiness is his unknown to her. 

CREUSA To ill this adds the deepest ill, a grief 
For me to mourn. 

TUTOR Born of some other woman 
Is this child yet to come, or did the god 
Declare one now in being? 

LEADER One advanced 
To manhood's prime he gave him: I was present. 

CREUSA What hast thou said? Thy words denounce to me 
Sorrows past speech, past utterance. 

TUTOR And to me. 

CREUSA How was this oracle accomplish'd? Tell me 
With clearest circumstance: who is this youth? 

LEADER Him as a son Apollo gave, whom first, 
Departing from the god, thy lord should meet. 

CREUSA O my unhappy fate! I then am left 
Childless to pass my life, childless, alone, 
Amid my lonely house! Who was declared? 
Whom did the husband of this wretch first meet? 
How meet him? Where behold him? Tell me all. 

LEADER Dost thou, my honoured mistress, call to mind 
The youth that swept the temple? This is he. 

CREUSA O, through the liquid air that I could fly, 
Far from the land of Greece, ev'n to the stars 
Fix'd in the western sky! Ah me, what grief, 
What piercing grief is mine I 

TUTOR Say, by what name 
Did he address his son, if thou hast heard it? 
Or does it rest in silence, yet unknown? 

LEADER Ion, for that he first advanced to meet him. 

TUTOR And of what mother? 

LEADER That I could not learn: 
Abrupt was his departure (to inform thee 
Of all I know, old man) to sacrifice, 
With hospitable rites, a birthday feast; 
And in the hallow'd cave, from her apart, 
With his new son to share the common banquet. 

TUTOR Lady, we by thy husband are betrayed, 
For I with thee am grieved, with contrived fraud 
Insulted, from thy father's house cast forth. 
I speak not this in hatred to thy lord, 
But that I love thee more: a stranger he 
Came to the city and thy royal house, 
And wedded thee, all thy inheritance 
Receiving, by some other woman now 
Discover'd to have children privately: 
How privately I'll tell thee: when he saw 
Thou hadst no child, it pleased him not to bear 
A fate like thine; but by some favourite slave, 
His paramour by stealth, he hath a son. 
Him to some Delphian gave he, distant far, 
To educate; who to this sacred house 
Consign'd, as secret here, received his nurture. 
He knowing this, and that his son advanced 
To manhood, urged thee to attend him hither, 
Pleading thy childless state. Nor hath the god 
Deceived thee: he deceived thee, and long since 
Contrived this wily plan to rear his son, 
That, if convicted, he might charge the god, 
Himself excusing: should the fraud succeed, 
He would observe the times when he might safely 
Consign to him the empire of thy land. 
And this new name was at his leisure form'd, 
Ion, for that he came by chance to meet him. 
I hate those ill-designing men, that form 
Plans of injustice, and then gild them over 
With artificial ornament: to me 
Far dearer is the honest simple friend, 
Than one whose quicker wit is train'd to ill. 
And to complete this fraud, thou shalt be urged 
To take into thy house, to lord it there, 
This low-born youth, this offspring of a slave. 
Though ill, it had been open, had he pleaded 
Thy want of children, and, thy leave obtain'd, 
Brought to thy house a son that could have boasted 
His mother noble; or, if that displeased thee, 
He might have sought a wife from Aeolus. 
Behooves thee then to act a woman's part, 
Or grasp the sword, or drug the poison'd bowl, 
Or plan some deep design to kill thy husband, 
And this his son, before thou find thy death 
From them: if thou delay, thy life is lost: 
For when beneath one roof two foes are met, 
The one must perish. I with ready zeal 
Will aid thee in this work, and kill the youth, 
Entering the grot where he prepares the feast; 
Indifferent in my choice, so that I pay 
What to my lords I owe, to live or die. 
If there is aught that causes slaves to blush, 
It is the name; in all else than the free 
The slave is nothing worse, if he be virtuous. 
I too, my honour'd queen, with cheerful mind 
Will share thy fate, or die, or live with honour. 

CREUSA  (chanting) How, o my soul, shall I be silent, how

Disclose this secret? Can I bid farewell 
To modesty? What else restrains my tongue? 
To how severe a trial am I brought! 
Hath not my husband wrong'd me? Of my house 
I am deprived, deprived of children; hope 
Is vanish'd, which my heart could not resign, 
With many an honest wish this furtive bed 
Concealing, this lamented bed concealing. 
But by the star-bespangled throne of Jove, 
And by the goddess high above my rocks 
Enshrined, by the moist banks that bend around 
The hallow'd lake by Triton form'd, no longer 
Will I conceal this bed, but ease my breast, 
The oppressive load discharged. Mine eyes drop tears, 
My soul is rent, to wretchedness ensnared 
By men, by gods, whom I will now disclose, 
Unkind betrayers of the beds they forced. 
O thou, that wakest on thy seven-string'd lyre 
Sweet notes, that from the rustic lifeless horn 
Enchant the ear with heavenly melody, 
Son of Latona, thee before this light 
Will I reprove. Thou camest to me, with gold 
Thy locks all glittering, as the vermeil flowers 
I gather'd in my vest to deck my bosom 
With the spring's glowing hues; in my white hand 
Thy hand enlocking, to the cavern'd rock 
Thou led'st me; naught avail'd my cries, that call'd 
My mother; on thou led'st me, wanton god, 
Immodestly, to Venus paying homage. 
A son I bare thee, O my wretched fate! 
Him (for I fear'd my mother) in thy cave 
I placed, where I unhappy was undone 
By thy unhappy love. Woe, woe is me! 
And now my son and thine, ill-fated babe, 
Is rent by ravenous vultures; thou, meanwhile, 
Art to thy lyre attuning strains of joy. 
Set of Latona, thee I call aloud 
Who from thy golden seat, thy central throne, 
Utterest thine oracle: my voice shall reach 
Thine ear: ungrateful lover, to my husband, 
No grace requiting, thou hast given a son 
To bless his house; my son and thine, unown'd, 
Perish'd a prey to birds; the robes that wrapp'd 
The infant's limbs, his mother's work, lost with him. 
Delos abhors thee, and the laurel boughs 
With the soft foliage of the palm o'erhung, 
Grasping whose round trunk with her hands divine, 
Latona thee, her hallow'd offspring, bore. 

LEADER Ah, what a mighty treasury of ills 
Is open'd here, a copious source of tears! 

TUTOR Never, my daughter, can I sate my eyes 
With looking on thy face: astonishment 
Bears me beyond my senses. I had stemm'd 
One tide of evils, when another flood 
High-surging overwhelm'd me from the words 
Which thou hast utter'd, from the present ills 
To an ill train of other woes transferr'd. 
What say'st thou? Of what charge dost thou implead 
The god? What son hast thou brought forth? Where placed him

A feast for vultures? Tell me all again. 

CREUSA Though I must blush, old man, yet I will speak. 

TUTOR I mourn with generous grief at a friend's woes. 

CREUSA Hear then: the northward-pointing cave thou knowest,

And the Cecropian rocks, which we call Macrai. 

TUTOR Where stands a shrine to Pan, and altars nigh. 

CREUSA There in a dreadful conflict I engaged. 

TUTOR What! my tears rise ready to meet thy words. 

CREUSA By Phoebus drawn reluctant to his bed. 

TUTOR Was this, my daughter, such as I suppose? 

CREUSA I know not: but if truth, I will confess it. 

TUTOR Didst thou in silence mourn this secret ill? 

CREUSA This was the grief I now disclose to thee. 

TUTOR This love of Phoebus how didst thou conceal? 

CREUSA I bore a son. Hear me, old man, with patience. 

TUTOR Where? who assisted? or wast thou alone? 

CREUSA Alone, in the same cave where compress'd. 

TUTOR Where is thy son, that childless now no more 

CREUSA Dead, good old man, to beasts of prey exposed. 

TUTOR Dead! and the ungrateful Phoebus gives no aid? 

CREUSA None: in the house of Pluto a young guest. 

TUTOR Whose hands exposed him? Surely not thine own. 

CREUSA Mine, in the shades of night, wrapp'd in his vests.

TUTOR Hadst thou none with thee conscious to this deed?

CREUSA My misery, and the secret place alone. 

TUTOR How durst thou in a cavern leave thy son? 

CREUSA How? uttering many sad and plaintive words. 

TUTOR Ah, cruel was thy deed, the god more cruel. 

CREUSA Hadst thou but seen him stretch his little hands!

TUTOR Seeking the breast, or reaching to thine arms? 

CREUSA To this, deprived of which he suffer'd wrong. 

TUTOR And what induced thee to expose thy child? 

CREUSA Hope that the god's kind care would save his son.

TUTOR How are the glories of thy house destroy'd! 

CREUSA Why, thine head cover'd, dost thou pour these tears?

TUTOR To see thee and thy father thus unhappy. 

CREUSA This is the state of man: nothing stands firm. 

TUTOR No longer then, my child, let grief oppress us. 

CREUSA What should I do? In misery all is doubt. 

TUTOR First on the god that wrong'd thee be avenged. 

CREUSA How shall a mortal 'gainst a god prevail? 

TUTOR Set this revered oracular shrine on fire. 

CREUSA I fear: ev'n now I have enough of ills. 

TUTOR Attempt what may be done then; kill thy husband. 

CREUSA The nuptial bed I reverence, and his goodness. 

TUTOR This son then, which is now brought forth against thee.

CREUSA How? Could that be, how warmly should I wish it.

TUTOR Thy train hath swords: instruct them to the deed.

CREUSA I go with speed: but where shall it be done? 

TUTOR In the hallow'd tent, where now he feasts his friends.

CREUSA An open murder, and with coward slaves! 

TUTOR If mine displease, propose thou some design. 

CREUSA I have it, close and easy to achieve. 

TUTOR In both my faithful services are thine. 

CREUSA Hear then: not strange to thee the giants' war. 

TUTOR When they in Phlegra fought against the gods. 

CREUSA There the earth brought forth the Gorgon, horrid monster.

TUTOR In succour of her sons to annoy the gods? 

CREUSA Ev'n so: her Pallas slew, daughter of Jove. 

TUTOR What fierce and dreadful form did she then wear? 

CREUSA Her breastplate arm'd with vipers wreathed around.

TUTOR A well-known story; often have I heard it. 

CREUSA Her spoils before her breast Minerva wore. 

TUTOR The aegis; so they call the vest of Pallas. 

CREUSA So named, when in the war she join'd the gods. 

TUTOR But how can this, my child, annoy thy foes? 

CREUSA Thou canst not but remember Erichthonius. 

TUTOR Whom first of thy high race the earth brought forth.

CREUSA To him while yet an infant Pallas gave- 

TUTOR What? Thy slow preface raises expectation. 

CREUSA Two drops of blood that from the Gorgon fell. 

TUTOR And on the human frame what power have these? 

CREUSA The one works death, the other heals disease. 

TUTOR In what around the infant's body hung? 

CREUSA Enclosed in gold: he gave them to my father. 

TUTOR At his decease then they devolved to thee? 

CREUSA Ay, and I wear it as a bracelet; look. 

TUTOR Their double qualities how temper'd, say. 

CREUSA This drop, which from her hollow vein distill'd,-

TUTOR To what effect applied? What is its power? 

CREUSA Medicinal, of sovereign use to life. 

TUTOR The other drop, what faculties hath that? 

CREUSA It kills, the poison of the Gorgon dragons. 

TUTOR And dost thou bear this gore blended in one? 

CREUSA No, separate; for with ill good mixes not. 

TUTOR O my dear child, thou hast whate'er we want. 

CREUSA With this the boy shall die, and thou shalt kill him.

TUTOR Where? How? 'Tis thine to speak, to dare be mine.

CREUSA At Athens, when he comes beneath my roof. 

TUTOR I like not this; what I proposed displeased. 

CREUSA Dost thou surmise what enters now my thoughts? 

TUTOR Suspicion waits thee, though thou kill him not. 

CREUSA Thou hast judged well: a stepdame's hate is proverb'd.

TUTOR Then kill him here; thou mayst disown the deed. 

CREUSA My mind ev'n now anticipates the pleasure. 

TUTOR Thus shalt thou meet thy husband's wiles with wiles

CREUSA This shalt thou do: this little golden casket 
Take from my hand, Minerva's gift of old; 
To where my husband secretly prepares 
The sacrifice, bear this beneath thy vest. 
That supper ended, when they are to pour 
Libations to the gods, thou mayst infuse 
In the youth's goblet this: but take good heed, 
Let none observe thee; drug his cup alone 
Who thinks to lord it in my house: if once 
It pass his lips, his foot shall never reach 
Illustrious Athens: death awaits him here.  (She gives him the casket.)

TUTOR Go thou then to the hospitable house 
Prepared for thy reception: be it mine, 
Obedient to thy word to do this deed. 
Come then, my aged foot, be once more young 
In act, though not in years, for past recall 
That time is fled: kill him, and bear him forth. 
Well may the prosperous harbour virtuous thought; 
But when thou wouldst avenge thee on thy foes, 
There is no law of weight to hinder thee.  (They both go out.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Daughter of Ceres, Trivia hear, 
Propitious regent of each public way 
Amid the brightness of the day, 
Nor less when night's dark hour engenders fear; 
The fulness of this goblet guide 
To check with death this stripling's pride, 
For whom my queen this fatal draught prepares, 
Tinged with the Gorgon's venom'd gore: 
That seat, which mid Erechtheus' royal heirs 
His pride claims, it shall claim no more: 
Never may one of alien blood disgrace 
The imperial honours of that high-born race! 

(antistrophe 1)

Should not this work of fate succeed, 
Nor the just vengeance of my queen prevail; 
Should this apt time of daring fail, 
And hope, that flatters now, desert the deed; 
Slaughter shall other means afford, 
The strangling cord, the piercing sword; 
For rage from disappointed rage shall flow, 
And try each. various form of death; 
For never shall my queen this torment know; 
Ne'er while she draws this vital breath, 
Brook in her house that foreign lords should shine, 
Clothed with the splendours of her ancient line. 

(strophe 2)

Thou whom the various hymn delights, 
Then thy bright choir of beauteous dames among, 
Dancing the stream's soft brink along, 
Thou seest the guardian of thy mystic rites, 
Thy torch its midnight vigils keep, 
Thine eye meantime disdaining sleep; 
While with thee dances Jove's star-spangled plain. 
And the moon dances up the sky: 
Ye nymphs, that lead to grots your frolic train, 
Beneath the gulfy founts that lie: 
Thou gold-crown'd queen, through night's dark regions fear'd,

And thou, her mother, power revered, 
How should I blush to see this youth unknown! 
This Delphic vagrant, hope to seize the throne. 

(antistrophe 2)

You, who the melting soul to move, 
In loose, dishonest airs the Muse employ 
To celebrate love's wanton joy, 
The joy of unallow'd, unholy love, 
See how our pure and modest law 
Can lavish man's lewd deeds o'erawe! 
Ye shameless bards, revoke each wanton air; 
No more these melting measures frame; 
Bid the chaste muse in Virtue's cause declare, 
And mark man's lawless bed with shame! 
Ungrateful is this Jove-descended lord; 
For, his wife's childless bed abhorr'd, 
Lewdly he courts the embrace of other dames, 
And with a spurious son his pride inflames.  (An ATTENDANT of CREUSA
enters.)  

ATTENDANT Athenian dames, where shall I find our queen,

The daughter of Erechtheus? Seeking her, 
This city have I walked around in vain. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS And for what cause, my fellow-slave? What means

Thy hasty foot? What tidings dost thou bring? 

ATTENDANT We are discover'd; and the rulers here 
Seek her, that she may die o'erwhelm'd with stones. 

LEADER Ah me! what wouldst thou say? Are our designs 
Of secret ruin to this youth disclosed? 

ATTENDANT They are; and know, the worst of ills await you.

LEADER How were our dark devices brought to light? 

ATTENDANT The god, that justice might receive no stain 
Caused it to triumph o'er defeated wrong. 

LEADER How? as a suppliant, I conjure thee, tell me 
Of this inform'd, if we must die, more freely 
Wish we to die than see the light of heaven. 

ATTENDANT Soon as the husband of Creusa left 
The god's oracular shrine, this new-found son 
He to the feast, and sacrifice prepared 
To the high gods, led with him. Xuthus then 
Went where the hallow'd flame of Bacchus mounts, 
That on each rock's high point the victim's blood 
Might flow, a grateful offering for his son 
Thus recognised, to whom he gave in charge, 
"Stay thou, and with the artist's expert aid 
Erect the sheltering tent: my rites perform'd 
To the kind gods that o'er the genial bed 
Preside, should I be there detain'd too long, 
Spread the rich table to my present friends." 
This said, he led the victims to the rocks. 
Meanwhile with reverent heed the son 'gan rear 
On firm supporters the wide tent, whose sides 
No masonry require, yet framed to exclude 
The mid-day sun's hot beams, or his last rays 
When sinking in the west: the lengthen'd lines 
Equally distant comprehend a square 
Of twice five thousand feet (the skilful thus 
Compute it), space to feast (for so he will'd) 
All Delphi: from the treasures of the god 
He took the sacred tapestry, and around 
Hung the rich shade, on which the admiring eye 
Gazes with fix'd delight: first over head, 
Like a broad pennon spread the extended woof, 
Which from the Amazonian spoils the son 
Of Jove, Alcides, hallow'd to the god; 
In its bright texture interwov'n a sky 
Gathering the stars in its ethereal round, 
While downwards to the western wave the sun 
His steeds declines, and to his station high 
Draws up the radiant flame of Hesperus. 
Meanwhile the Night robed in her sable stole, 
Her unreign'd car advances; on her state 
The stars attend; the Pleiads mounting high, 
And with his glittering sword Orion arm'd; 
Above, Arcturus to the golden pole 
Inclines; full-orb'd the month-dividing moon 
Takes her bright station, and the Hyades 
Marked by the sailor: distant in the rear, 
Aurora ready to relume the day, 
And put the stars to flight. The sides were graced 
With various textures of the historic woof, 
Barbaric arguments; in gallant trim 
Against the fleet of Greece the hostile fleet 
Rides proudly on. Here monstrous forms portray'd 
Human and brutal mix'd: the Thracian steeds 
Are seized, the hinds, and the adventurous chase 
Of savage lions: figured nigh the doors, 
Cecrops, attended by his daughter's, roll'd 
His serpent train: in the ample space within 
He spread the festal table, richly deck'd 
With golden goblets. Now the herald walk'd 
His round, each native that inclined to grace 
The feast inviting: to the crowded tent 
They hasten, crown'd with garlands, and partake 
The exquisite repast. The pleasured sense 
Now satiate, in the midst an old man stood, 
Officious in his ministry, which raised 
Much mirth among the guests; for from the urns 
He fill'd the lavers, and with fragrant myrrh 
Incensed the place; the golden bowls he claim'd 
His charge. When now the jocund pipes 'gan breathe 
Harmonious airs, and the fresh goblet stood 
Ready to walk its round, the old man said, 
"Away with these penurious cups, and bring 
Capacious bowls; so shall you quickly bathe 
Your spirits in delight." With speed were brought 
Goblets of gold and silver: one he took 
Of choicer frame; and, seemingly intent 
To do his young lord honour, the full vase 
Gave to his hands, but in the wine infused 
A drug of poisonous power, which, it is said, 
His queen supplied, that the new son no more 
Might view the light of heav'n; but unobserved 
He mix'd it. As the youth among the rest 
Pour'd the libation, 'mid the attendant slaves 
Words of reproach one utter'd: he, as train'd 
Within the temple and with expert seers, 
Deem'd them of evil omen, and required 
Another goblet to be filled afresh- 
The former a libation to the god, 
He cast upon the ground, instructing all 
To pour, like him, the untasted liquor down. 
Silence ensued: the sacred bowls we fill 
With wines of Byblos; when a troop of doves 
Came fluttering in, for undisturb'd they haunt 
The dome of Phoebus: in the floating wine 
They dipp'd their bills to drink, then raised their heads,

Gurgling it down their beauteous-plumed throats. 
Harmless to all the spilt wine, save to her 
That lighted where the youth had pour'd his bowl: 
She drank, and straight convulsive shiverings seized 
Her beauteous plumes; around in giddy rings 
She whirl'd, and in a strange and mournful note 
Seem'd to lament: amazement seized the guests, 
Seeing the poor bird's pangs: her heart heaved thick, 
And stretching out her scarlet legs, she died. 
Rending his robes, the son of Phoebus given 
Sprung from the table, and aloud exclaim'd,- 
"What wretch design'd to kill me? Speak, old man: 
Officious was thy ministry; the bowl 
I from thy hand received." Then straight he seized 
His aged arm, and to the question held him, 
As in the fact discover'd: he thus caught, 
Reluctant and constrain'd, own'd the bold deed, 
The deadly goblet by Creusa drugg'd. 
Forth from the tent, the guests attending, rush'd 
The youth announced by Phoebus, and amid 
The Pythian regents says,-"O hallow'd land! 
This stranger dame, this daughter of Erechtheus 
Attempts my life by poison." Then decreed 
The Delphian lords (nor did one voice dissent) 
That she should die, my mistress, from the rock 
Cast headlong, as the deed was aim'd against 
A sacred life, and impiously presumed 
This hallow'd place with murder to profane. 
Demanded by the state, she this way bends 
Her wretched steps. Unhappy to this shrine 
She came through fond desire of children; here, 
Together with her hopes, her life is lost. 

CHORUS  (singing) None, there is none, from death no flight,

To me no refuge; our dark deed 
Betray'd, betray'd to open light; 
The festive bowl, with sprightly wine that flow'd 
Mix'd with the Gorgon's viperous blood, 
An offering to the dead decreed, 
All is betray'd to light: and I, 
Cast headlong from the rock, must die. 
What flight shall save me from this death, 
Borne on swift pinions through the air, 
Sunk to the darksome cave beneath, 
Or mounted on the rapid car? 
Or shall the flying bark unfurl its sails? 
Alas, my queen, no flight avails, 
Save when some god's auspicious power 
Shall snatch us from the dangerous hour. 
Unhappy queen, what pangs shall rend thy heart! 
Shall we, who plann'd the deathful deed, 
Be caught within the toils we spread, 
While justice claims severe her chast'ning part?  (CREUSA rushes in.)

CREUSA I am pursued, ye faithful females, doom'd 
To death: the Pythian council hath decreed it: 
My life is forfeited. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Unhappy lady, 
We know the dreadful ills that close thee round. 

CREUSA Ah, whither shall I fly? From instant death 
Scarce hath my foot sped hither, from my foes 
By stealth escaping. 

LEADER Whither wouldst thou fly, 
But to this altar? 

CREUSA What will that avail me? 

LEADER To kill a suppliant there the law forbids. 

CREUSA But by the law I perish. 

LEADER If their hands 
Had seized thee. 

CREUSA Dreadful contest, with drawn swords 
They hastily advance. 

LEADER Now take thy seat 
At the altar: shouldst thou die ev'n there, thy blood 
Will call the vengeance of the god on those 
That spilt it: but our fortune we must bear.  (She takes refuge at
the altar as ION, guards, and Delphians enter.)  

ION Bull-visaged sire Cephisus, what a viper 
Hast thou produced? a dragon from her eyes 
Glaring pernicious flame. Each daring deed 
Is hers: less venomous the Gorgon's blood, 
With which she purposed to have poison'd me. 
Seize her, that the Parnassian rocks may tease 
Those nice-adjusted ringlets of her hair, 
As down the craggy precipice she bounds. 
Here my good genius saved me, e'er I came 
To Athens, there beneath my stepdame's wiles 
To fall; amid my friends thy fell intents 
Have I unravell'd, what a pest to me, 
Thy hate how deadly: had thy toils inclosed me 
In thine own house, thou wouldst at once have sent me 
With complete ruin to the shades below. 
But nor the altar nor Apollo's shrine 
Shall save thee. Pity, might her voice be heard, 
Would rather plead for me and for my mother, 
She absent, yet the name remains with me. 
Behold that sorceress; with what art she wove 
Wile after wile; the altar of the god 
Impress'd her not with awe, as if secure. 
No vengeance waited her unhallow'd deeds. 

CREUSA I charge thee, kill me not, in my own right, 
And in the god's, whose suppliant here I stand. 

ION What right hast thou to plead Apollo's name? 

CREUSA My person hallow'd to the god I offer. 

ION Yet wouldst thou poison one that is the god's. 

CREUSA Thou wast no more Apollo's, but thy father's. 

ION I have been, of a father's wealth I speak. 

CREUSA And now I am: thou hast that claim no more. 

ION But thou art impious: pious were my deeds. 

CREUSA As hostile to my house, I would have kill'd thee.

ION Did I against thy country march in arms? 

CREUSA And more; thou wouldst have fired Erechtheus' house.

ION What torch, what brands, what flames had I prepared?

CREUSA There wouldst thou fix, seizing my right by force.

ION The land which he possess'd, my father gave me. 

CREUSA What claim hath there the race of Aeolus? 

ION He was its guardian, not with words but arms. 

CREUSA Its soldier then; an inmate, not its lord. 

ION Wouldst thou, through fear of what might happen, kill me?

CREUSA Lest death should be my portion, if not thine. 

ION Childless thou enviest that my father found me. 

CREUSA And wilt thou make a childless house thy spoil? 

ION Devolves my father then no share to me? 

CREUSA His shield, his spear; be those thine heritage. 

ION Come from the altar, quit that hallow'd seat. 

CREUSA Instruct thy mother, whosoe'er she be. 

ION Shalt thou unpunish'd meditate my death? 

CREUSA Within this shrine if thou wilt murder me. 

ION What pleasure mid these sacred wreaths to die? 

CREUSA We shall grieve one, by whom we have been grieved.

ION Strange, that the god should give these laws to men,

Bearing no stamp of honour, nor design'd 
With provident thought: it is not meet to place 
The unrighteous at his altars; worthier far 
To be chased thence; nor decent that the vile 
Should with their touch pollute the gods: the good, 
Oppress'd with wrongs, should at those hallow'd seats 
Seek refuge: ill beseems it that the unjust 
And just alike should seek protection there.  (As ION and his followers
are about to tear CREUSA from the altar, the PRIESTESS of Apollo enters
from the temple.)  

PRIESTESS Forbear, my son, leaving the oracular seat, 
I pass this pale, the priestess of the god, 
The guardian of the tripod's ancient law, 
Call'd to this charge from all the Delphian dames. 

ION Hail, my loved mother, dear, though not my parent. 

PRIESTESS Yet let me have the name, 'tis grateful to me.

ION Hast thou yet heard their wily trains to kill me? 

PRIESTESS I have; but void of mercy thou dost wrong. 

ION Should I not ruin those that sought my life? 

PRIESTESS Stepdames to former sons are always hostile. 

ION And I to stepdames ill intreated thus. 

PRIESTESS Be not, this shrine now leaving for thy country.

ION How, then, by thy monition should I act? 

PRIESTESS Go with good omens, pure to Athens go. 

ION All must be pure that kill their enemies. 

PRIESTESS So do not thou: attentive mark my words. 

ION Speak: from good will whate'er thou say'st must flow.

PRIESTESS Seest thou the vase I hold beneath mine arm? 

ION I see an ancient ark entwined with wreaths. 

PRIESTESS In this long since an infant I received thee.

ION What say'st thou? New is thy discourse and strange.

PRIESTESS In silence have I kept them: now I show them.

ION And why conceal'd, as long since thou received'st me?

PRIESTESS The god would have thee in his shrine a servant.

ION Is that no more his will? How shall I know it? 

PRIESTESS Thy father shown, he sends thee from this land.

ION Hast thou preserved these things by charge, or how?

PRIESTESS It was the god that so disposed my thought. 

ION With what design? Speak, finish thy discourse. 

PRIESTESS Ev'n to this hour to keep what then I found. 

ION What gain imports this to me, or what loss? 

PRIESTESS There didst thou lie wrapp'd in thy infant vests.

ION Thou hast produced whence I may find my mother. 

PRIESTESS Since now the god so wills, but not before. 

ION This is a day of bless'd discoveries. 

PRIESTESS Now take them: o'er all Asia, and the bounds 
Of Europe hold thy progress: thou shalt know 
These tokens. To do pleasure to the god, 
I nurtured thee, my son; now to thy hand 
Restore what was his will I should receive 
Unbidden, and preserve: for what intent 
It was his will, I have not power to say. 
That I had these, or where they were conceal'd, 
No mortal knew. And now farewell: the love 
I bear thee equals what a parent feels. 
Let thy inquiries where they ought begin; 
First, if some Delphian virgin gave thee birth, 
And in this shrine exposed thee; next, if one 
Of Greece. From me, and from the god, who feels 
An interest in thy fortune, thou hast all.  (She goes into the temple
after giving ION the ark.)  

ION Ah me! the moist tear trickles from mine eye, 
When I reflect that she who gave me birth, 
By stealth espoused, may with like secrecy 
Have sold me, to my infant lips her breast 
Denied: but in the temple of the god 
Without a name, a servile life I led. 
All from the god was gracious, but from fortune 
Harsh; for the time when in a mother's arms 
I in her fondness should have known some joy 
Of life, from that sweet care was I estranged, 
A mother's nurture: nor less wretched she, 
Thus forced to lose the pleasure in her son. 
But I will take this vase, and to the god 
Bear it, a hallow'd offering; that from thence 
I may find nothing which I would not find. 
Should she, that gave me being, chance to be 
A slave, to find her were a greater ill, 
Than to rest silent in this ignorance. 
O Phoebus, in thy temple hang I this. 
What am I doing? War I not against 
The pleasure of the god, who saved for me 
These pledges of my mother? I must dare, 
And open these: my fate cannot be shunn'd.  (He opens the ark.)  Ye
sacred garlands, what have you so long 
Conceal'd: ye bands, that keep these precious relics? 
Behold the cover of this circular vase; 
Its freshness knows no change, as if a god 
So will'd; this osier-woven ark yet keeps 
Its soundness undecay'd; yet many a year, 
Since it contain'd this treasured charge, has pass'd. 

CREUSA What an unhoped-for sight do I behold! 

ION I thought thou long hadst known to keep thee silent.

CREUSA Silence is mine no more; instruct not me; 
For I behold the ark, wherein of old 
I laid thee, O my son, an infant babe; 
And in the caves of Cecrops, with the rocks 
Of Macrai roof'd, exposed thee: I will quit 
This altar, though I run on certain death. 

ION Seize her; for by the impulse of the god 
She leaves the sculptured altar: bind her bands. 

CREUSA Instantly kill me, so that I embrace 
This vase, and thee, and these thy conceal'd pledges. 

ION Is not this strange? I take thee at thy word. 

CREUSA Not strange: a friend thou by thy friends art found.

ION Thy friend! Yet wouldst thou kill me secretly. 

CREUSA My son: if that to parents is most dear. 

ION Forbear thy wiles; I shall refute them well. 

CREUSA Might I but to come to what I wish, my son! 

ION Is this vase empty, or contains it aught? 

CREUSA Thy infant vests, in which I once exposed thee. 

ION And wilt thou name them to me, ere thou see them? 

CREUSA If I recount them not, be death my meed. 

ION Speak then: thy confidence hath something strange. 

CREUSA A tissue, look, which when a child I wrought. 

ION What is it? Various are the works of virgins. 

CREUSA A slight, unfinish'd essay of the loom. 

ION What figure wrought? Thou shalt not take me thus. 

CREUSA A Gorgon central in the warp enwoven- 

ION What fortune haunts me, O supreme of gods! 

CREUSA And like an aegis edged with serpents round. 

ION Such is the woof, and such the vest I find. 

CREUSA Thou old embroidery of my virgin bands! 

ION Is there aught else besides this happy proof? 

CREUSA Two dragons, an old work, their jaws of gold. 

ION The gift of Pallas, who thus nurtures children? 

CREUSA Emblems of Erichthonius of old times. 

ION Why? for what use? Explain these works of gold. 

CREUSA For ornaments to grace the infant's neck. 

ION See, here they are; the third I wish to know. 

CREUSA A branch of olive then I wreathed around thee, 
Pluck'd from that tree which from Minerva's rock 
First sprung; if it be there, it still retains 
Its verdure: for the foliage of that olive, 
Fresh in immortal beauty, never fades. 

ION O my dear mother! I with joy behold thee. 
With transport 'gainst thy cheek my cheek recline.  (They embrace.)

CREUSA My son, my son, far dearer to thy mother 
Than yon bright orb  (the god will pardon me)  , 
Do I then hold thee in my arms, thus found 
Beyond my hopes, when in the realms below, 
I thought thy habitation 'mong the dead? 

ION O my dear mother, in thy arms I seem 
As one that had been dead to life return'd. 

CREUSA Ye wide-expanded rays of heavenly light, 
What notes, what high-raised strains shall tell my joy? 
This pleasure whence, this unexpected transport? 

ION There was no blessing farther from my thoughts 
Than this, my mother, to be found thy son. 

CREUSA I tremble yet. 

ION And hast thou yet a fear, 
Holding me, not to hold me? 

CREUSA Such fond hopes 
Long time have I renounced. Thou hallow'd matron, 
From whom didst thou receive my infant child? 
What bless'd hand brought him to Apollo's shrine? 

ION It was the god's appointment: may our life 
To come be happy, as the past was wretched. 

CREUSA Not without tears, my son, wast thou brought forth;

Nor without anguish did my hands resign thee. 
Now breathing on thy cheek I feel a joy 
Transporting me with heartfelt ecstasies. 

ION The words expressive of thy joys speak mine. 

CREUSA Childless no more, no more alone, my house 
Now shines with festive joy; my realms now own 
A lord; Erechtheus blooms again; no more 
His high-traced lineage sees night darkening round, 
But glories in the sun's refulgent beams. 

ION Now let my father, since he's present here, 
Be partner of the joy which I have given you. 

CREUSA What says my son? 

ION Such, such as I am proved. 

CREUSA What mean thy words? Far other is thy birth. 

ION Ah me! thy virgin bed produced me base. 

CREUSA Nor bridal torch, my son, nor bridal dance 
Had graced my nuptial rites, when thou wast born. 

ION Then I'm a wretch, a base-born wretch: say whence. 

CREUSA Be witness, thou by whom the Gorgon died,- 

ION What means this adjuration? 

CREUSA Who hast fix'd 
High o'er my cave thy seat amid the rocks 
With olive clothed. 

ION Abstruse thy words, and dark. 

CREUSA Where on the cliffs the nightingale attunes 
Her songs, Apollo- 

ION Why Apollo named? 

CREUSA Led me in secret to his bed. 

ION Speak on; 
Thy words import some glorious fortune to me. 

CREUSA Thee in the tenth revolving month, my son, 
A secret pang to Phoebus did I bear. 

ION Thy words, if true, are grateful to my soul. 

CREUSA These swathing bands, thy mother's virgin work, 
Wove by my flying shuttle, round thy body 
I roll'd; but from thy lips my breast withheld, 
A mother's nouriture, nor bathed thy bands 
In cleansing lavers; but to death exposed thee, 
Laid in the dreary cave, to birds of prey 
A feast, rent piecemeal by their ravenous beaks. 

ION Cruel, my mother, was thy deed. 

CREUSA By fear 
Constrain'd, my son, I cast thy life away; 
Unwillingly I left thee there to die. 

ION And from my hands unholy were thy death. 

CREUSA Dreadful was then my fortune, dreadful here, 
Whirl'd by the eddying blast from misery there 
To misery here, and back again to joy: 
Her boisterous winds are changed; may she remain 
In this repose: enough of ills are past: 
After the storm soft breathes a favouring gale. 

LEADER From this example, mid the greatest ills 
Never let mortal man abandon hope. 

ION O thou, that hast to thousands wrought a change 
Of state ere this, involving them in ills, 
And raising them to happiness again; 
Fortune, to what a point have I been carried, 
Ready to kill my mother, horrid thought! 
But in the sun's bright course each day affords 
Instruction. Thee, my mother, have I found, 
In that discovery bless'd; nor hath my birth 
Aught I can blame: yet one thing would I say 
To thee alone:-walk this way: to thine ear 
In secret would I whisper this, and throw 
The veil of darkness o'er each circumstance. 
Take heed, my mother, lest thy maiden fault 
Seeks in these secret nuptials to conceal 
Its fault, then charges on the god the deed; 
And, fearing my reproach, to Phoebus gives 
A son, to Phoebus whom thou didst not bear. 

CREUSA By her, who 'gainst the giants in her car 
Fought by the side of Jove, victorious Pallas, 
No one of mortal race is father to thee, 
But he who brought thee up, the royal Phoebus. 

ION Why give his son then to another father? 
Why say that I was born the son of Xuthus? 

CREUSA Not born the son of Xuthus; but he gives thee, 
Born from himself as friend to friend may give 
His son, and heir adopted to his house. 

ION True is the god, his tripod else were vain. 
Not without cause then is my mind perplex'd. 

CREUSA Hear what my thoughts suggest: to work thee good

Apollo placed thee in a noble house. 
Acknowledged his, the rich inheritance 
Could not be thine, nor could a father's name; 
For I conceal'd my nuptials, and had plann'd 
To kill thee secretly: for this the god 
In kindness gives thee to another father. 

ION My mind is prompt to entertain such thoughts; 
But, entering at his shrine will I inquire 
If from a mortal father I am sprung, 
Or from Apollo.-Ha! what may this be? 
What god above the hallow'd dome unveils 
His radiant face that shines another sun? 
Haste, let us fly: the presence of the gods 
'Tis not for mortals to behold, and live.  (MINERVA appears from above.)

MINERVA Fly not; in me no enemy you fly; 
At Athens friendly to you, and no less 
Here. From that land I come, so named from me, 
By Phoebus sent with speed: unmeet he deems it 
To show himself before you, lest with blame 
The past be mention'd; this he gave in charge, 
To tell thee that she bore thee, and to him, 
Phoebus thy father; he to whom he gave thee, 
Not as to the author of thy being gives thee, 
But to the inheritance of a noble house. 
This declaration made, lest thou shouldst die, 
Kill'd by thy mother's wily trains, or she 
By thee, these means to save you he devised. 
These things in silence long conceal'd, at Athens 
The royal Phoebus would have made it known 
That thou art sprung from her, thy father he: 
But to discharge my office, and unfold 
The oracle of the god, for which you yoked 
Your chariots, hear: Creusa, take thy son, 
Go to the land of Cecrops: let him mount 
The royal throne; for, from Erechtheus sprung, 
That honour is his due, the sovereignty 
Over my country: through the states of Greece 
Wide his renown shall spread; for from his root 
Four sons shall spring, that to the land, the tribes, 
The dwellers on my rock, shall give their names. 
Geleon the first, Hopletes, Argades, 
And from my aegis named Aegicores: 
Their sons in fate's appointed time shall fix 
Their seats along the coast, or in the isles 
Girt by the Aegean sea, and to my land 
Give strength; extending thence the opposite plains 
Of either continent shall make their own, 
Europe and Asia, and shall boast their name 
Ionians, from the honour'd Ion call'd. 
To thee by Xuthus shall a son be born, 
Dorus, from whom the Dorian state shall rise 
To high renown; in the Pelopian land, 
Another near the Rhian cliffs, along 
The sea-wash'd coast, his potent monarchy 
Shall stretch, Achaeus; and his subject realms 
Shall glory in their chief's illustrious name. 
Well hath Apollo quitted him in all: 
First, without pain he caused thee bear a son. 
That from thy friends thou mightst conceal his birth; 
After the birth, soon as his infant limbs 
Thy hands had clothed, to Mercury he gave 
The charge to take the babe, and in his arms 
Convey him hither; here with tenderness 
He nurtured him, nor suffer'd him to perish. 
Guard now the secret that he is thy son, 
That his opinion Xuthus may enjoy 
Delighted: thou too hast thy blessings, lady. 
And now, farewell: from this relief from ills 
A prosperous fortune I to both announce. 

ION O Pallas, daughter of all-powerful Jove! 
Not with distrust shall we receive thy words: 
I am convinced that Phoebus is my father, 
My mother she, not unassured before. 

CREUSA Hear me too, now: Phoebus I praise, before 
Unpraised; my son he now restores, of whom 
Till now I deem'd him heedless. Now these gates 
Are beauteous to mine eyes; his oracles 
Now grateful to my soul, unpleasant late. 
With rapture on these sounding rings my hands 
Now hang; with rapture I address the gates. 

MINERVA This I approve, thy former wayward thoughts 
Resign'd, with honour that thou name the god. 
Slow are the gifts of Heaven, but found at length 
Not void of power. 

CREUSA My son, let us now go 
To Athens. 

MINERVA Go; myself will follow you. 

CREUSA A noble guard, and friendly to the state. 

MINERVA But seat him high on thy paternal throne. 

CREUSA A rich possession, and I glory in him.  (MINERVA disappears.)

CHORUS  (singing) Son of Latona and all-powerful Jove, 
Apollo, hail! Though fortune's blackest storms 
Rage on his house, the man whose pious soul 
Reveres the gods, assumes a confidence, 
And justly: for the good at length obtain 
The meed of virtue; but the unholy wretch 
(Such is his nature) never can be happy. 

THEEND

 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the great temple of Diana of the Taurians. A blood- stained
altar is prominently in view. IPHIGENIA, clad as a priestess, enters
from the temple.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

IPHIGENIA To Pisa, by the fleetest coursers borne, 
Comes Pelops, son of Tantalus, and weds 
The virgin daughter of Oenomaus: 
From her sprung Atreus; Menelaus from him, 
And Agamemnon; I from him derive 
My birth, his Iphigenia, by his queen, 
Daughter of Tyndarus. Where frequent winds 
Swell the vex'd Euripus with eddying blasts, 
And roll the darkening waves, my father slew me, 
A victim to Diana, so he thought, 
For Helen's sake, its bay where Aulis winds, 
To fame well known; for there his thousand ships, 
The armament of Greece, the imperial chief 
Convened, desirous that his Greeks should snatch 
The glorious crown of victory from Troy, 
And punish the base insult to the bed 
Of Helen, vengeance grateful to the soul 
Of Menelaus. But 'gainst his ships the sea 
Long barr'd, and not one favouring breeze to swell 
His flagging sails, the hallow'd flames the chief 
Consults, and Calchas thus disclosed the fates:- 
"Imperial leader of the Grecian host, 
Hence shalt thou not unmoor thy vessels, ere 
Diana as a victim shall receive 
Thy daughter Iphigenia: what the year 
Most beauteous should produce, thou to the queen 
Dispensing light didst vow to sacrifice: 
A daughter Clytemnestra in thy house 
Then bore (the peerless grace of beauty thus 
To me assigning); her must thou devote 
The victim." Then Ulysses by his arts, 
Me, to Achilles as design'd a bride, 
Won from my mother. My unhappy fate 
To Aulis brought me; on the altar there 
High was I placed, and o'er me gleam'd the sword, 
Aiming the fatal wound: but from the stroke 
Diana snatch'd me, in exchange a hind 
Giving the Grecians; through the lucid air 
Me she conveyed to Tauris, here to dwell, 
Where o'er barbarians a barbaric king 
Holds his rude sway, named Thoas, whose swift foot 
Equals the rapid wing: me he appoints 
The priestess of this temple, where such rites 
Are pleasing to Diana, that the name 
Alone claims honour; for I sacrifice 
(Such, ere I came, the custom of the state) 
Whatever Grecian to this savage shore 
Is driven: the previous rites are mine; the deed 
Of blood, too horrid to be told, devolves 
On others in the temple: but the rest, 
In reverence to the goddess, I forbear. 
But the strange visions which the night now past 
Brought with it, to the air, if that may soothe 
My troubled thought, I will relate. I seem'd, 
As I lay sleeping, from this land removed, 
To dwell at Argos, resting on my couch 
Mid the apartments of the virgin train. 
Sudden the firm earth shook: I fled, and stood 
Without; the battlements I saw, and all 
The rocking roof fall from its lofty height 
In ruins to the ground: of all the house, 
My father's house, one pillar, as I thought, 
Alone was left, which from its cornice waved 
A length of auburn locks, and human voice 
Assumed: the bloody office, which is mine 
To strangers here, respecting, I to death, 
Sprinkling the lustral drops, devoted it 
With many tears. My dream I thus expound:- 
Orestes, whom I hallow'd by my rites, 
Is dead: for sons are pillars of the house; 
They, whom my lustral lavers sprinkle, die. 
I cannot to my friends apply my dream, 
For Strophius, when I perish'd, had no son. 
Now, to my brother, absent though he be, 
Libations will I offer: this, at least, 
With the attendants given me by the king, 
Virgins of Greece, I can: but what the cause 
They yet attend me not within the house, 
The temple of the goddess, where I dwell?  (She goes into the temple.
ORESTES and PYLADES enter cautiously.)  

ORESTES Keep careful watch, lest some one come this way.

PYLADES I watch, and turn mine eye to every part. 

ORESTES And dost thou, Pylades, imagine this 
The temple of the goddess, which we seek, 
Our sails from Argos sweeping o'er the main? 

PYLADES Orestes, such my thought, and must be thine. 

ORESTES And this the altar wet with Grecian blood? 

PYLADES Crimson'd with gore behold its sculptured wreaths.

ORESTES See, from the battlements what trophies hang! 

PYLADES The spoils of strangers that have here been slain.

ORESTES Behooves us then to watch with careful eye. 
O Phoebus, by thy oracles again 
Why hast thou led me to these toils? E'er since, 
In vengeance for my father's blood, I slew 
My mother, ceaseless by the Furies driven, 
Vagrant, an outcast, many a bending course 
My feet have trod: to thee I came, of the 
Inquired this whirling frenzy by what means, 
And by what means my labours I might end. 
Thy voice commanded me to speed my course 
To this wild coast of Tauris, where a shrine 
Thy sister hath, Diana; thence to take 
The statue of the goddess, which from heaven 
(So say the natives) to this temple fell: 
This image, or by fraud or fortune won, 
The dangerous toil achieved, to place the prize 
In the Athenian land: no more was said; 
But that, performing this, I should obtain 
Rest from my toils. Obedient to thy words, 
On this unknown, inhospitable coast 
Am I arrived. Now, Pylades (for thou 
Art my associate in this dangerous task,) 
Of thee I ask, What shall we do? for high 
The walls, thou seest, which fence the temple round. 
Shall we ascend their height? But how escape 
Observing eyes? Or burst the brazen bars? 
Of these we nothing know: in the attempt 
To force the gates, or meditating means 
To enter, if detected, we shall die. 
Shall we then, ere we die, by flight regain 
The ship in which we hither plough'd the sea? 

PYLADES Of flight we brook no thought, nor such hath been

Our wont; nor may the god's commanding voice 
Be disobey'd; but from the temple now 
Retiring, in some cave, which the black sea 
Beats with its billows, we may lie conceal'd 
At distance from our bark, lest some, whose eyes 
May note it, bear the tidings to the king, 
And we be seized by force. But when the eye 
Of night comes darkling on, then must we dare, 
And take the polish'd image from the shrine, 
Attempting all things: and the vacant space 
Between the triglyphs (mark it well) enough 
Is open to admit us; by that way 
Attempt we to descend: in toils the brave 
Are daring; of no worth the abject soul. 

ORESTES This length of sea we plough'd not, from this coast,

Nothing effected, to return: but well 
Hast thou advised; the god must be obey'd. 
Retire we then where we may lie conceal'd; 
For never from the god will come the cause, 
That what his sacred voice commands should fall 
Effectless. We must dare. No toil to youth 
Excuse, which justifies inaction, brings.  (They go out. IPHIGENIA
and the CHORUS enter from the temple.)  

IPHIGENIA  (singing) You, who your savage dwellings hold

Nigh this inhospitable main, 
'Gainst clashing rocks with fury roll'd, 
From all but hallow'd words abstain. 
Virgin queen, Latona's grace, joying in the mountain chase,

To thy court, thy rich domain, 
To thy beauteous-pillar'd fane 
Where our wondering eyes behold 
Battlements that blaze with gold, 
Thus my virgin steps I bend, 
Holy, the holy to attend; 
Servant, virgin queen, to thee; 
Power, who bear'st life's golden key, 
Far from Greece for steeds renown'd, 
From her walls with towers crown'd, 
From the beauteous-planted meads 
Where his train Eurotas leads, 
Visiting the loved retreats, 
Once my father's royal seats. 

CHORUS  (singing) I come. What cares disturb thy rest? 
Why hast thou brought me to the shrine? 
Doth some fresh grief afflict thy breast? 
Why bring me to this seat divine? 
Thou daughter of that chief, whose powers 
Plough'd with a thousand keels the strand 
And ranged in arms shook Troy's proud towers 
Beneath the Atreidae's great command! 

IPHIGENIA  (singing) O ye attendant train, 
How is my heart oppress'd with wo! 
What notes, save notes of grief, can flow, 
A harsh and unmelodious strain? 
My soul domestic ills oppress with dread, 
And bid me mourn a brother dead. 
What visions did my sleeping sense appall 
In the past dark and midnight hour! 
'Tis ruin, ruin all. 
My father's houses-it is no more: 
No more is his illustrious line. 
What dreadful deeds hath Argos known! 
One only brother, Fate, was mine; 
And dost thou rend him from me? Is he gone 
To Pluto's dreary realms below? 
For him, as dead, with pious care 
This goblet I prepare; 
And on the bosom of the earth shall flow 
Streams from the heifer mountain-bred, 
The grape's rich juice, and, mix'd with these, 
The labour of the yellow bees, 
Libations soothing to the dead. 
Give me the oblation: let me hold 
The foaming goblet's hallow'd gold. 

O thou, the earth beneath, 
Who didst from Agamemnon spring; 
To thee, deprived of vital breath, 
I these libations bring. 
Accept them: to thy honour'd tomb, 
Never, ah! never shall I come; 
Never these golden tresses bear, 
To place them there, there shed the tear; 
For from my country far, a hind 
There deem'd as slain, my wild abode I find. 

CHORUS  (singing) To thee thy faithful train 
The Asiatic hymn will raise, 
A doleful, a barbaric strain, 
Responsive to thy lays, 
And steep in tears the mournful song,- 
Notes, which to the dead belong; 
Dismal notes, attuned to woe 
By Pluto in the realms below: 
No sprightly air shall we employ 
To cheer the soul, and wake the sense of joy. 

IPHIGENIA  (singing) The Atreidae are no more; 
Extinct their sceptre's golden light; 
My father's house from its proud height 
Is fallen: its ruins I deplore. 
Who of her kings at Argos holds his reign, 
Her kings once bless'd? But Sorrow's train 
Rolls on impetuous for the rapid steeds 
Which o'er the strand with Pelops fly. 
From what atrocious deeds 
Starts the sun back, his sacred eye 
Of brightness, loathing, turn'd aside? 
And fatal to their house arose, 
From the rich ram, Thessalia's golden pride, 
Slaughter on slaughter, woes on woes: 
Thence, from the dead ages past, 
Vengeance came rushing on its prey, 
And swept the race of Tantalus away. 
Fatal to thee its ruthless haste; 
To me too fatal, from the hour 
My mother wedded, from the night 
She gave me to life's opening light, 
Nursed by affliction's cruel power. 
Early to me, the Fates unkind, 
To know what sorrow is assign'd: 
Me Leda's daughter, hapless dame, 
First blooming offspring of her bed 
(A father's conduct here I blame,) 
A joyless victim bred; 
When o'er the strand of Aulis, in the pride 
Of beauty kindling flames of love, 
High on my splendid car I move, 
Betrothed to Thetis' son a bride: 
Ah, hapless bride, to all the train 
Of Grecian fair preferr'd in vain! 
But now, a stranger on this strand, 
'Gainst which the wild waves beat, 
I hold my dreary, joyless seat, 
Far distant from my native land, 
Nor nuptial bed is mine, nor child, nor friend. 
At Argos now no more I raise 
The festal song in Juno's praise; 
Nor o'er the loom sweet-sounding bend, 
As the creative shuttle flies; 
Give forms of Titans fierce to rise; 
And, dreadful with her purple spear, 
Image Athenian Pallas there: 
But on this barbarous shore 
The unhappy stranger's fate I moan, 
The ruthless altar stain'd with gore, 
His deep and dying groan; 
And, for each tear that weeps his woes, 
From me a tear of pity flows. 
Of these the sad remembrance now must sleep: 
A brother dead, ah me! I weep: 
At Argos him, by fate oppress'd, 
I left an infant at the breast, 
A beauteous bud, whose opening charms 
Then blossom'd in his mother's arms; 
Orestes, born to high command, 
The imperial sceptre of the Argive land. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Leaving the sea-wash'd shore a herdsman comes

Speeding, with some fresh tidings to thee fraught.  (A HERDSMAN enters.)

HERDSMAN Daughter of Agamemnon, and bright gem 
Of Clytemnestra, hear strange things from me. 

IPHIGENIA And what of terror doth thy tale import? 

HERDSMAN Two youths, swift-rowing 'twixt the clashing rocks

Of our wild sea, are landed on the beach, 
A grateful offering at Diana's shrine, 
And victims to the goddess. Haste, prepare 
The sacred lavers, and the previous rites. 

IPHIGENIA Whence are the strangers? from what country named?

HERDSMAN From Greece: this only, nothing more, I know. 

IPHIGENIA Didst thou not hear what names the strangers bear?

HERDSMAN One by the other was call'd Pylades. 

IPHIGENIA How is the stranger, his companion, named? 

HERDSMAN This none of us can tell: we heard it not. 

IPHIGENIA How saw you them? how seized them? by what chance?

HERDSMAN Mid the rude cliffs that o'er the Euxine hang-

IPHIGENIA And what concern have herdsmen with the sea? 

HERDSMAN To wash our herds in the salt wave we came. 

IPHIGENIA To what I ask'd return: how seized you them? 
Tell me the manner; this I wish to know: 
For slow the victims come, nor hath some while 
The altar of the goddess, as was wont, 
Been crimson'd with the streams of Grecian blood. 

HERDSMAN Our herds, which in the forest feed, we drove 
Amid the tide that rushes to the shore, 
'Twixt the Symplegades: it was the place, 
Where in the rifted rock the chafing surge 
Hath hallow'd a rude cave, the haunt of those 
Whose quest is purple. Of our number there 
A herdsman saw two youths, and back return'd 
With soft and silent step; then pointing, said, 
"Do you not see them? These are deities 
That sit there." One, who with religious awe 
Revered the gods, with hands uplifted pray'd, 
His eyes fix'd on them,-"Son of the sea-nymph 
Leucothoe, guardian of the labouring bark, 
Our lord Palaemon, be propitious to us! 
Or sit you on our shores, bright sons of Jove, 
Castor and Pollux? Or the glorious boast 
Of Nereus, father of the noble choir 
Of fifty Nereids?" One, whose untaught mind 
Audacious folly harden'd 'gainst the sense 
Of holy awe, scoff'd at his prayers, and said,- 
"These are wreck'd mariners, that take their seat 
In the cleft rock through fear, as they have heard 
Our prescribed rite, that here we sacrifice 
The stranger." To the greater part he seem'd 
Well to have spoken, and we judged it meet 
To seize the victims, by our country's law 
Due to the goddess. Of the stranger youths, 
One at this instant started from the rock: 
Awhile he stood, and wildly toss'd his head, 
And groan'd, his loose arms trembling all their length, 
Convulsed with madness; and a hunter loud 
Then cried,-"Dost thou behold her, Pylades? 
Dost thou not see this dragon fierce from hell 
Rushing to kill me, and against me rousing 
Her horrid vipers? See this other here, 
Emitting fire and slaughter from her vests, 
Sails on her wings, my mother in her arms 
Bearing, to hurl this mass of rock upon me! 
Ah, she will kill me! Whither shall I fly?" 
His visage might we see no more the same, 
And his voice varied; now the roar of bulls, 
The howl of dogs now uttering, mimic sounds 
Sent by the maddening Furies, as they say. 
Together thronging, as of death assured, 
We sit in silence; but he drew his sword, 
And, like a lion rushing mid our herds, 
Plunged in their sides the weapon, weening thus 
To drive the Furies, till the briny wave 
Foam'd with their blood. But when among our herds 
We saw this havoc made, we all 'gan rouse 
To arms, and blew our sounding shells to alarm 
The neighbouring peasants; for we thought in fight 
Rude herdsmen to these youthful strangers, train'd 
To arms, ill match'd; and forthwith to our aid 
Flock'd numbers. But, his frenzy of its force 
Abating, on the earth the stranger falls, 
Foam bursting from his mouth: but when he saw 
The advantage, each adventured on and hurl'd 
What might annoy him fallen: the other youth 
Wiped off the foam, took of his person care, 
His fine-wrought robe spread over him; with heed 
The flying stones observing, warded of 
The wounds, and each kind office to his friend 
Attentively perform'd. His sense return'd; 
The stranger started up, and soon perceived 
The tide of foes that roll'd impetuous on, 
The danger and distress that closed them round. 
He heaved a sigh; an unremitting storm 
Of stones we pour'd, and each incited each: 
Then we his dreadful exhortation heard:- 
"Pylades, we shall die; but let us die 
With glory: draw thy sword, and follow me." 
But when we saw the enemies advance 
With brandish'd swords, the steep heights crown'd with wood

We fell in flight: but others, if one flies, 
Press on them; if again they drive these back, 
What before fled turns, with a storm of stones 
Assaulting them; but, what exceeds belief, 
Hurl'd by a thousand hands, not one could hit 
The victims of the goddess: scarce at length, 
Not by brave daring seized we them, but round 
We closed upon them, and their swords with stones 
Beat, wily, from their hands; for on their knees 
They through fatigue had sunk upon the ground: 
We bare them to the monarch of this land: 
He view'd them, and without delay to the 
Sent them devoted to the cleansing vase, 
And to the altar. Victims such as these, 
O virgin, wish to find; for if such youths 
Thou offer, for thy slaughter Greece will pay, 
Her wrongs to thee at Aulis well avenged. 

LEADER These things are wonderful, which thou hast told

Of him, whoe'er he be, the youth from Greece 
Arrived on this inhospitable shore. 

IPHIGENIA 'Tis well: go thou, and bring the strangers hither:

What here is to be done shall be our care.  (The HERDSMAN departs.)
O my unhappy heart! before this hour 
To strangers thou wast gentle, always touch'd 
With pity, and with tears their tears repaid, 
When Grecians, natives of my country, came 
Into my hands: but from the dreams, which prompt 
To deeds ungentle, showing that no more 
Orestes views the sun's fair light, whoe'er 
Ye are that hither come, me will you find 
Relentless now. This is the truth, my friends: 
My heart is rent; and never will the wretch, 
Who feels affliction's cruel tortures, bear 
Good-will to those that are more fortunate. 
Never came gale from Jove, nor flying bark, 
Which 'twixt the dangerous rocks of the Euxine sea 
Brought Helen hither, who my ruin wrought, 
Nor Menelaus; that on them my foul wrongs 
I might repay, and with an Aulis here 
Requite the Aulis there, where I was seized, 
And, as a heifer, by the Grecians slain: 
My father too, who gave me birth, was priest. 
Ah me! the sad remembrance of those ills 
Yet lives: how often did I stroke thy cheek, 
And, hanging on thy knees, address thee thus:- 
"Alas, my father! I by thee am led 
A bride to bridal rites unbless'd and base: 
Them, while by thee I bleed, my mother hymns, 
And the Argive dames, with hymeneal strains, 
And with the jocund pipe the house resounds: 
But at the altar I by thee am slain; 
For Pluto was the Achilles, not the son 
Of Peleus, whom to me thou didst announce 
The affianced bridegroom, and by guile didst bring 
To bloody nuptials in the rolling car." 
But, o'er mine eyes the veil's fine texture spread, 
This brother in my hands who now is lost, 
I clasp'd not, though his sister; did not press 
My lips to his, through virgin modesty, 
As going to the house of Peleus: then 
Each fond embrace I to another time 
Deferr'd, as soon to Argos to return. 
If, O unhappy brother, thou art dead, 
From what a state, thy father's envied height 
Of glory, loved Orestes, art thou torn!- 
These false rules of the goddess much I blame: 
Whoe'er of mortals is with slaughter stain'd, 
Or hath at childbirth given assisting hands, 
Or chanced to touch aught dead, she as impure 
Drives from her altars; yet herself delights 
In human victims bleeding at her shrine. 
Ne'er did Latona from the embrace of Jove 
Bring forth such inconsistence: I then deem 
The feast of Tantalus, where gods were guests, 
Unworthy of belief, as that they fed 
On his son's flesh delighted; and I think 
These people, who themselves have a wild joy 
In shedding human blood, their savage guilt 
Charge on the goddess: for this truth I hold; 
None of the gods is evil, or doth wrong.  (She enters the temple.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Ye rocks, ye dashing rocks, whose brow 
Frowns o'er the darken'd deeps below; 
Whose wild, inhospitable wave, 
From Argos flying and her native spring, 
The virgin once was known to brave, 
Tormented with the brize's maddening sting, 
From Europe when the rude sea o'er 
She pass'd to Asia's adverse shore; 
Who are these hapless youths, that dare to land, 
Leaving those soft, irriguous meads, 
Where, his green margin fringed with reeds, 
Eurotas rolls his ample tide, 
Or Dirce's hallow'd waters glide, 
And touch this barbarous, stranger-hating strand, 
The altars where a virgin dews, 
And blood the pillar'd shrine imbrues? 

(antistrophe 1)

Did they with oars impetuous sweep 
(Rank answering rank) the foamy deep, 
And wing their bark with flying sails, 
To raise their humble fortune their desire; 
Eager to catch the rising gales, 
Their bosoms with the love of gain on fire? 
For sweet is hope to man's fond breast; 
The hope of gain, insatiate guest, 
Though on her oft attends Misfortune's train; 
For daring man she tempts to brave 
The dangers of the boisterous wave, 
And leads him heedless of his fate 
Through many a distant barbarous state. 
Vain his opinions, his pursuits are vain! 
Boundless o'er some her power is shown, 
But some her temperate influence own. 

(strophe 2)

How did they pass the dangerous rocks 
Clashing with rude, tremendous shocks? 
How pass the savage-howling shore, 
Where once the unhappy Phineus held his reign, 
And sleep affrighted flies its roar, 
Steering their rough course o'er this boisterous main, 
Form'd in a ring, beneath whose waves 
The Nereid train in high arch'd caves 
Weave the light dance, and raise the sprightly song, 
While, whispering in their swelling sails, 
Soft Zephyrs breathe, or southern gales 
Piping amid their tackling play, 
As their bark ploughs its watery way 
Those hoary cliffs, the haunts of birds, along, 
To that wild strand, the rapid race 
Where once Achilles deign'd to grace? 

(antistrophe 2)

O that from Troy some chance would bear 
Leda's loved daughter, fatal fair 
(The royal virgin's vows are mine) 
That her bright tresses roll'd in crimson dew, 
Her warm blood flowing at this shrine 
The altar of the goddess might imbrue; 
And Vengeance, righteous to repay 
Her former mischiefs, seize her prey! 
But with what rapture should I hear his voice, 
If one this shore should reach from Greece, 
And bid the toils of slavery cease! 
Or might I in the hour of rest 
With pleasing dreams of Greece be bless'd; 
So in my house, my native land rejoice; 
In sleep enjoy the pleasing strain 
For happiness restored again  (IPHIGENIA enters from the temple.)

IPHIGENIA But the two youths, their hands fast bound in chains,

The late-seized victims to the goddess, come. 
Silence, my friends; for, destined at the shrine 
To bleed, the Grecian strangers near approach; 
And no false tidings did the herdsman bring. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Goddess revered, if grateful to thy soul

This state presents such sacrifice, accept 
The victims, which the custom of this land 
Gives thee, but deem'd unholy by the Greeks.  (Guards lead in ORESTES
and PYLADES, bound.)  

IPHIGENIA No more; that to the goddess each due rite 
Be well perform'd shall be my care. Unchain 
The strangers' hands; that, hallow'd as they are, 
They may no more be bound.  (The guards release ORESTES and PYLADES.)
Go you, prepare 
Within the temple what the rites require. 
Unhappy youths, what mother brought you forth, 
Your father who? Your sister, if perchance 
Ye have a sister, of what youths deprived? 
For brother she shall have no more. Who knows 
Whom such misfortunes may attend? For dark 
What the gods will creeps on; and none can tell 
The ills to come: this fortune from the sight 
Obscures. But, O unhappy strangers, say, 
Whence came you? Sail'd you long since for this land? 
But long will be your absence from your homes, 
For ever, in the dreary realms below. 

ORESTES Lady, whoe'er thou art, why for these things 
Dost thou lament? why mourn for ills, which soon 
Will fall on us? Him I esteem unwise, 
Who, when he sees death near, tries to o'ercome 
Its terrors with bewailings, without hope 
Of safety: ill he adds to ill, and makes 
His folly known, yet dies. We must give way 
To fortune; therefore mourn not thou for us: 
We know, we are acquainted with your rites. 

IPHIGENIA Which of you by the name of Pylades 
Is call'd? This first it is my wish to know. 

ORESTES If aught of pleasure that may give thee, he. 

IPHIGENIA A native of what Grecian state, declare. 

ORESTES What profit knowing this wouldst thou obtain? 

IPHIGENIA And are you brothers, of one mother born? 

ORESTES Brothers by friendship, lady, not by birth. 

IPHIGENIA To thee what name was by thy father given? 

ORESTES With just cause I Unhappy might be call'd. 

IPHIGENIA I ask not that; to fortune that ascribe. 

ORESTES Dying unknown, rude scoffs I shall avoid. 

IPHIGENIA Wilt thou refuse? Why are thy thoughts so high?

ORESTES My body thou mayst kill, but not my name. 

IPHIGENIA Wilt thou not say a native of what state? 

ORESTES The question naught avails, since I must die. 

IPHIGENIA What hinders thee from granting me this grace?

ORESTES The illustrious Argos I my country boast. 

IPHIGENIA By the gods, stranger, is thy birth from thence?

ORESTES My birth is from Mycenae, once the bless'd. 

IPHIGENIA Dost thou an exile fly, or by what fate? 

ORESTES Of my free will, in part not free, I fly. 

IPHIGENIA Wilt thou then tell me what I wish to know? 

ORESTES Whate'er is foreign to my private griefs. 

IPHIGENIA To my dear wish from Argos art thou come. 

ORESTES Not to my wish; but if to thine, enjoy it. 

IPHIGENIA Troy, whose fame spreads so wide, perchance thou know'st.

ORESTES O that I ne'er had known her, ev'n in dreams! 

IPHIGENIA They say she is no more, by war destroy'd. 

ORESTES It is so: you have heard no false reports. 

IPHIGENIA Is Helena with Menelaus return'd? 

ORESTES She is; and one I love her coming rues. 

IPHIGENIA Where is she? Me too she of old hath wrong'd.

ORESTES At Sparta with her former lord she dwells. 

IPHIGENIA By Greece, and not by me alone abhorr'd! 

ORESTES I from her nuptials have my share of grief. 

IPHIGENIA And are the Greeks, as Fame reports, return'd?

ORESTES How briefly all things dost thou ask at once! 

IPHIGENIA This favour, ere thou die, I wish to obtain. 

ORESTES Ask, then: since such thy wish, I will inform thee.

IPHIGENIA Calchas, a prophet,-came he back from Troy? 

ORESTES He perish'd at Mycenae such the fame. 

IPHIGENIA Goddess revered! But doth Ulysses live? 

ORESTES He lives, they say, but is not yet return'd. 

IPHIGENIA Perish the wretch, nor see his country more! 

ORESTES Wish him not ill, for all with him is ill. 

IPHIGENIA But doth the son of sea-born Thetis live? 

ORESTES He lives not: vain his nuptial rites at Aulis. 

IPHIGENIA That all was fraud, as those who felt it say.

ORESTES But who art thou, inquiring thus of Greece? 

IPHIGENIA I am from thence, in early youth undone. 

ORESTES Thou hast a right to inquire what there hath pass'd.

IPHIGENIA What know'st thou of the chief, men call the bless'd?

ORESTES Who? Of the bless'd was not the chief I knew. 

IPHIGENIA The royal Agamemnon, son of Atreus. 

ORESTES Of him I know not, lady; cease to ask. 

IPHIGENIA Nay, by the gods, tell me, and cheer my soul.

ORESTES He's dead, the unhappy chief: no single ill. 

IPHIGENIA Dead! By what adverse fate? O wretched me! 

ORESTES Why mourn for this? How doth it touch thy breast?

IPHIGENIA The glories of his former state I mourn. 

ORESTES Dreadfully murdered by a woman's hand. 

IPHIGENIA How wretched she that slew him, he thus slain!

ORESTES Now then forbear: of him inquire no more. 

IPHIGENIA This only: lives the unhappy monarch's wife? 

ORESTES She, lady, is no more, slain by her son. 

IPHIGENIA Alas, the ruin'd house! What his intent? 

ORESTES To avenge on her his noble father slain. 

IPHIGENIA An ill, but righteous deed, how justly done! 

ORESTES Though righteous, by the gods be is not bless'd.

IPHIGENIA Hath Agamemnon other offspring left? 

ORESTES He left one virgin daughter, named Electra. 

IPHIGENIA Of her that died a victim is aught said? 

ORESTES This only, dead, she sees the light no more. 

IPHIGENIA Unhappy she! the father too who slew her! 

ORESTES For a bad woman she unseemly died. 

IPHIGENIA At Argos lives the murdered father's son? 

ORESTES Nowhere he lives, poor wretch! and everywhere. 

IPHIGENIA False dreams, farewell; for nothing you import.

ORESTES Nor are those gods, that have the name of wise,

Less false than fleeting dreams. In things divine, 
And in things human, great confusion reigns. 
One thing is left; that, not unwise of soul, 
Obedient to the prophet's voice he perish'd; 
For that he perish'd, they who know report. 

LEADER What shall we know, what of our parents know? 
If yet they live or not, who can inform us? 

IPHIGENIA Hear me: this converse prompts a thought, which gives

Promise of good, ye youths of Greece, to you, 
To these, and me: thus may it well be done, 
If, willing to my purpose, all assent. 
Wilt thou, if I shall save thee, go for me 
A messenger to Argos, to my friends 
Charged with a letter, which a captive wrote, 
Who pitied me, nor murderous thought my hand, 
But that he died beneath the law, these rites 
The goddess deeming just? for from that hour 
I have not found who might to Argos bear 
Himself my message, back with life return'd, 
Or send to any of my friends my letter. 
Thou, therefore, since it seems thou dost not bear 
Ill-will to me, and dost Mycenae know, 
And those I wish to address, be safe, and live, 
No base reward for a light letter, life 
Receiving; and let him, since thus the state 
Requires, without thee to the goddess bleed. 

ORESTES Virgin unknown, well hast thou said in all 
Save this, that to the goddess he should bleed 
A victim; that were heavy grief indeed. 
I steer'd the vessel to these ills; he sail'd 
Attendant on my toils: to gain thy grace 
By his destruction, and withdraw myself 
From sufferings, were unjust: thus let it be: 
Give him the letter; to fulfil thy wish, 
To Argos he will bear it: me let him 
Who claims that office, slay: base is his soul, 
Who in calamities involves his friends, 
And saves himself; this is a friend, whose life, 
Dear to me as my own, I would preserve. 

IPHIGENIA Excellent spirit! from some noble root 
It shows thee sprung, and to thy friends a friend 
Sincere; of those that share my blood if one 
Remains, such may he be! for I am not 
Without a brother, strangers, from my sight 
Though distant now. Since then thy wish is such, 
Him will I send to Argos; he shall bear 
My letter; thou shalt die; for this desire 
Hath strong possession of thy noble soul. 

ORESTES Who then shall do the dreadful deed, and slay me?

IPHIGENIA I: to atone the goddess is my charge. 

ORESTES A charge unenvied, virgin, and unbless'd. 

IPHIGENIA Necessity constrains: I must obey. 

ORESTES Wilt thou, a woman, plunge the sword in men? 

IPHIGENIA No: but thy locks to sprinkle round is mine. 

ORESTES Whose then, if I may ask, the bloody deed? 

IPHIGENIA To some within the temple this belongs. 

ORESTES What tomb is destined to receive my corse? 

IPHIGENIA The hallow'd fire within, and a dark cave. 

ORESTES O, that a sister's hand might wrap these limbs!

IPHIGENIA Vain wish, unhappy youth, whoe'er thou art, 
Hast thou conceived; for from this barbarous land 
Far is her dwelling. Yet, of what my power 
Permits (since thou from Argos draw'st thy birth,) 
No grace will I omit: for in the tomb 
I will place much of ornament, and pour 
The dulcet labour of the yellow bee, 
From mountain flowers extracted, on thy pyre. 
But I will go, and from the temple bring 
The letter; yet 'gainst me no hostile thought 
Conceive. You, that attend here, guard them well, 
But without chains. To one, whom most I love 
Of all my friends, to Argos I shall send 
Tidings perchance unlook'd for; and this letter, 
Declaring those whom he thought dead alive, 
Shall bear him an assured and solid joy.  (She enters the temple.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Thee, o'er whose limbs the bloody drops shall
soon 
Be from the lavers sprinkled, I lament. 

ORESTES This asks no pity, strangers: but farewell. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Thee for thy happy fate we reverence, youth

Who to thy country shall again return. 

PYLADES To friends unwish'd, who leave their friends to die.

CHORUS  (chanting) Painful dismission! Which shall I esteem

Most lost, alas, alas! which most undone? 
For doubts my wavering judgment yet divide, 
If chief for thee my sighs should swell, or thee. 

ORESTES By the gods, Pylades, is thy mind touch'd 
In manner like as mine? 

PYLADES I cannot tell; 
Nor to thy question have I to reply. 

ORESTES Who is this virgin? With what zeal for Greece 
Made she inquiries of us what the toils 
At Troy, if yet the Grecians were return'd, 
And Calchas, from the flight of birds who form'd 
Presages of the future. And she named 
Achilles: with what tenderness bewail'd 
The unhappy Agamemnon! Of his wife 
She ask'd me,-of his children: thence her race 
This unknown virgin draws, an Argive; else 
Ne'er would she send this letter, nor have wish'd 
To know these things, as if she bore a share 
(If Argos flourish) in its prosperous state. 

PYLADES Such were my thoughts  (but thou hast given them words, Preventing
me)  of every circumstance, 
Save one: the fate of kings all know, whose state 
Holds aught of rank. But pass to other thoughts. 

ORESTES What? Share them; so thou best mayst be inform'd.

PYLADES That thou shouldst die, and I behold this light,

Were base: with thee I sail'd, with thee to die 
Becomes me; else shall I obtain the name 
Of a vile coward through the Argive state, 
And the deep vales of Phocis. Most will think 
(For most think ill) that by betraying the 
I saved myself, home to return alone; 
Or haply that I slew thee, and thy death 
Contrived, that in the ruin of thy house 
Thy empire I might grasp, to me devolved 
As wedded to thy sister, now sole heir. 
These things I fear, and hold them infamous. 
Behooves me then with thee to die, with the 
To bleed a victim, on the pyre with thine 
To give my body to the flames; for this 
Becomes me as thy friend. who dreads reproach. 

ORESTES Speak more auspicious words: 'tis mine to bear 
Ills that are mine; and single when the wo, 
I would not bear it double. What thou say'st 
Is vile and infamous, would light on me, 
Should I cause thee to die, who in my toils 
Hast borne a share: to me, who from the gods 
Suffer afflictions which I suffer, death 
Is not unwelcome: thou art happy, thine 
An unpolluted and a prosperous house; 
Mine impious and unbless'd: if thou art saved, 
And from my sister (whom I gave to thee, 
Betroth'd thy bride) art bless'd with sons, my name 
May yet remain, nor all my father's house 
In total ruin sink. Go then, and live: 
Dwell in the mansion of thy ancestors: 
And when thou comest to Greece, to Argos famed 
For warrior-steeds, by this right hand I charge the 
Raise a sepulchral mound, and on it place 
A monument to me; and to my tomb 
Her tears, her tresses let my sister give; 
And say, that by an Argive woman's hand 
I perish'd, to the altar's bloody rites 
A hallow'd victim. Never let thy soul 
Betray my sister, for thou seest her state, 
Of friends how destitute, her father's house 
How desolate. Farewell. Of all my friends, 
Thee have I found most friendly, from my youth 
Train'd up with me, in all my sylvan sports 
Thou dear associate, and through many toils 
Thou faithful partner of my miseries. 
Me Phoebus, though a prophet, hath deceived, 
And, meditating guile, hath driven me far 
From Greece, of former oracles ashamed; 
To him resign'd, obedient to his words, 
I slew my mother, and my meed is death. 

PYLADES Yes, I will raise thy tomb: thy sister's bed 
I never will betray, unhappy youth, 
For I will hold thee dearer when thou art dead, 
Than while thou livest; nor hath yet the voice 
Of Phoebus quite destroy'd thee, though thou stand 
To sometimes mighty but sometimes mighty woes 
Yield mighty changes, so when Fortune wills. 

ORESTES Forbear: the words of Phoebus naught avail me; 
For, passing from the shrine, the virgin comes.  (IPHIGENIA enters
from the temple. She is carrying a letter.)  

IPHIGENIA  (to the guards) Go you away, and in the shrine prepare

What those, who o'er the rites preside, require.  (The guards go into
the temple.)  Here, strangers, is the letter folded close:

What I would further, hear. The mind of man 
In dangers, and again, from fear relieved, 
Of safety when assured, is not the same: 
I therefore fear lest he, who should convey 
To Argos this epistle, when return'd 
Safe to his native country, will neglect 
My letter, as a thing of little worth. 

ORESTES What wouldst thou then? What is thy anxious thought?

IPHIGENIA This: let him give an oath that he will bear 
To Argos this epistle to those friends, 
To whom it is my ardent wish to send it. 

ORESTES And wilt thou in return give him thy oath? 

IPHIGENIA That I will do, or will not do, say what. 

ORESTES To send him from this barbarous shore alive. 

IPHIGENIA That's just: how should he bear my letter else?

ORESTES But will the monarch to these things assent? 

IPHIGENIA By me induced. Him I will see embark'd. 

ORESTES Swear then; and thou propose the righteous oath.

IPHIGENIA This, let him say, he to my friends will give.

PYLADES Well, to thy friends this letter I will give. 

IPHIGENIA Thee will I send safe through the darkening rocks.

PYLADES What god dost thou invoke to attest thy oath? 

IPHIGENIA Diana, at whose shrine high charge I hold. 

PYLADES And I heaven's potent king, the awful Jove. 

IPHIGENIA But if thou slight thy oath, and do me wrong?

PYLADES Never may I return. But if thou fail, 
And save me not? 

IPHIGENIA Then never, while I live, 
May I revisit my loved Argos more! 

PYLADES One thing, not mention'd, thy attention claims.

IPHIGENIA If honour owes it, this will touch us both. 

PYLADES Let me in this be pardon'd, if the bark 
Be lost, and with it in the surging waves 
Thy letter perish, and I naked gain 
The shore; no longer binding be the oath. 

IPHIGENIA Know'st thou what I will do? For various ills

Arise to those that plough the dangerous deep. 
What in this letter is contain'd, what here 
Is written, all I will repeat to thee, 
That thou mayst bear my message to my friends. 
'Gainst danger thus I guard: if thou preserve 
The letter, that though silent will declare 
My purport; if it perish in the sea, 
Saving thyself, my words too thou wilt save. 

PYLADES Well hast thou said touching the gods and me. 
Say then to whom at Argos shall I bear 
This letter? What relate as heard from thee? 

IPHIGENIA  (reading) This message to Orestes, to the son

Of Agamemnon, bear:-She, who was slain 
At Aulis, Iphigenia, sends thee this: 
She lives, but not to those who then were there. 

ORESTES Where is she? From the dead return'd to life? 

IPHIGENIA She whom thou seest: but interrupt me not. 
To Argos, O my brother, ere I die, 
Bear me from this barbaric land, and far 
Remove me from this altar's bloody rites, 
At which to slay the stranger is my charge.- 

ORESTES What shall I say? Where are we, Pylades? 

IPHIGENIA Or on thy house for vengeance will I call, 
Orestes. Twice repeated, learn the name. 

ORESTES Ye gods! 

IPHIGENIA In my cause why invoke the gods? 

ORESTES Nothing: proceed: my thoughts were wandering wide:

Strange things of thee unask'd I soon shall learn. 

IPHIGENIA Tell him the goddess saved me, in exchange 
A hind presenting, which my father slew 
A victim, deeming that he plunged his sword 
Deep in my breast: me in this land she placed. 
Thou hast my charge: and this my letter speaks. 

PYLADES O, thou hast bound me with an easy oath: 
What I have sworn with honest purpose, long 
Defer I not, but thus discharge mine oath. 
To thee a letter from thy sister, lo, 
I bear, Orestes; and I give it thee.  (PYLADES hands the letter to
ORESTES.)  

ORESTES I do receive it, but forbear to unclose its foldings, greater
pleasure first to enjoy 
Than words can give. My sister, O most dear, 
Astonish'd ev'n to disbelief, I throw 
Mine arms around thee with a fond embrace, 
In transport at the wondrous things I hear. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Stranger, thou dost not well with hands profane

Thus to pollute the priestess of the shrine, 
Grasping her garments hallow'd from the touch. 

ORESTES My sister, my dear sister, from one sire, 
From Agamemnon sprung, turn not away, 
Holding thy brother thus beyond all hope. 

IPHIGENIA My brother! Thou my brother! Wilt thou not 
Unsay these words? At Argos far he dwells. 

ORESTES Thy brother, O unhappy! is not there. 

IPHIGENIA Thee did the Spartan Tyndarus bring forth? 

ORESTES And from the son of Pelops' son I sprung, 

IPHIGENIA What say'st thou? Canst thou give me proof of this?

ORESTES I can: ask something of my father's house. 

IPHIGENIA Nay, it is thine to speak, mine to attend. 

ORESTES First let me mention things which I have heard 
Electra speak: to thee is known the strife 
Which fierce 'twixt Atreus and Thyestes rose. 

IPHIGENIA Yes, I have heard it; for the golden ram,- 

ORESTES In the rich texture didst thou not inweave it? 

IPHIGENIA O thou most dear! Thou windest near my heart.

ORESTES And image in the web the averted sun? 

IPHIGENIA In the fine threads that figure did I work. 

ORESTES For Aulis did thy mother bathe thy limbs? 

IPHIGENIA I know it, to unlucky spousals led. 

ORESTES Why to thy mother didst thou send thy locks? 

IPHIGENIA Devoted for my body to the tomb. 

ORESTES What I myself have seen I now as proofs 
Will mention. In thy father's house, hung high 
Within thy virgin chambers, the old spear 
Of Pelops, which he brandish'd when he slew 
Oenomaus, and won his beauteous bride, 
The virgin Hippodamia, Pisa's boast. 

IPHIGENIA O thou most dear (for thou art he,) most dear

Acknowledged, thee, Orestes, do I hold, 
From Argos, from thy country distant far? 

ORESTES And hold I thee, my sister, long deem'd dead? 
Grief mix'd with joy, and tears, not taught by woe 
To rise, stand melting in thy eyes and mine. 

IPHIGENIA Thee yet an infant in thy nurse's arms 
I left, a babe I left thee in the house. 
Thou art more happy, O my soul, than speech 
Knows to express. What shall I say? 'tis all 
Surpassing wonder and the power of words. 

ORESTES May we together from this hour be bless'd! 

IPHIGENIA An unexpected pleasure, O my friends, 
Have I received; yet fear I from my hands 
Lest to the air it fly. O sacred hearths 
Raised by the Cyclops! O my country, loved 
Mycenae! Now that thou didst give me birth, 
T thank thee; now I thank thee, that my youth 
Thou trainedst, since my brother thou has train'd, 
A beam of light, the glory of his house. 

ORESTES We in our race are happy; but our life, 
My sister, by misfortunes is unhappy. 

IPHIGENIA I was, I know, unhappy, when the sword 
My father, frantic, pointed at my neck. 

ORESTES Ah me! methinks ev'n now I see thee there. 

IPHIGENIA When to Achilles, brother, not a bride, 
I to the sacrifice by guile was led, 
And tears and groans the altar compass'd round. 

ORESTES Alas, the lavers there! 

IPHIGENIA I mourn'd the deed 
My father dared; unlike a father's love; 
Cruel, unlike a father's love, to me. 

ORESTES Ill deeds succeed to ill: if thou hadst slain 
Thy brother, by some god impell'd, what griefs 
Must have been thine at such a dreadful deed! 

IPHIGENIA  (chanting) Dreadful my brother, O how dreadful! scarce

Hast thou escaped a foul, unhallow'd death, 
Slain by my hands. But how will these things end? 
What Fortune will assist me? What safe means 
Shall I devise to send thee from this state, 
From slaughter, to thy native land, to Argos, 
Ere with thy blood the cruel sword be stain'd? 
This to devise, O my unhappy soul! 
This to devise is thine. Wilt thou by land, 
Thy bark deserted, speed thy flight on foot? 
Perils await thee mid these barbarous tribes, 
Through pathless wilds; and 'twixt the clashing rocks, 
Narrow the passage for the flying bark, 
And long. Unhappy, ah, unhappy me! 
What god, what mortal, what unlook'd-for chance 
Will expedite our dangerous way, and show 
Two sprung from Atreus a release from ills? 

LEADER What having seen and heard I shall relate, 
Is marvellous, and passes fabling tales. 

PYLADES When after absence long, Orestes, friend 
Meets friend, embraces will express their joy. 
Behooves us now, bidding farewell to grief, 
And heedful to obtain the glorious name 
Of safety, from this barbarous land to fly. 
The wise, of fortune not regardless, seize 
The occasion, and to happiness advance. 

ORESTES Well hast thou said; and Fortune here, I ween, 
Will aid us; to the firm and strenuous mind 
More potent works the influence divine. 

IPHIGENIA Nothing shall check, nothing restrain my speech:

First will I question thee what fortune waits 
Electra: this to know would yield me joy. 

ORESTES With him  (pointing to Pylades)  she dwells, and happy is
her life, 

IPHIGENIA Whence then is he? and from what father sprung?

ORESTES From Phocis: Strophius is his father named. 

IPHIGENIA By Atreus' daughter to my blood allied? 

ORESTES Nearly allied: my only faithful friend. 

IPHIGENIA He was not then, me when my father slew. 

ORESTES Childless was Strophius for some length of time.

IPHIGENIA O thou, the husband of my sister, hail 

ORESTES More than relation, my preserver too. 

IPHIGENIA But to thy mother why that dreadful deed? 

ORESTES Of that no more: to avenge my father's death. 

IPHIGENIA But for what cause did she her husband slay? 

ORESTES Of her inquire not: thou wouldst blush to hear.

IPHIGENIA The eyes of Argos now are raised to thee. 

ORESTES There Menelaus is lord; I, outcast, fly. 

IPHIGENIA Hath he then wrong'd his brother's ruin'd house?

ORESTES Not so: the Furies fright me from the land. 

IPHIGENIA The madness this, which seized thee on the shore?

ORESTES I was not first beheld unhappy there. 

IPHIGENIA Stern powers! they haunt thee for thy mother's blood.

ORESTES And ruthless make me champ the bloody bit. 

IPHIGENIA Why to this region has thou steer'd thy course?

ORESTES Commanded by Apollo's voice, I come. 

IPHIGENIA With what intent? if that may be disclosed. 

ORESTES I will inform thee, though to length of speech 
This leads. When vengeance from my hands o'ertook 
My mother's deeds-foul deeds, which let me pass 
In silence-by the Furies' fierce assaults 
To flight I was impell'd: to Athens then 
Apollo sent me, that, my cause there heard, 
I might appease the vengeful powers, whose names 
May not be utter'd: the tribunal there 
Is holy, which for Mars, when stain'd with blood, 
Jove in old times establish'd. There arrived, 
None willingly received me, by the gods 
As one abhorr'd; and they, who felt the touch 
Of shame, the hospitable board alone 
Yielded; and though one common roof beneath, 
Their silence showing they disdain'd to hold 
Converse with me, I took from them apart 
A lone repast; to each was placed a bowl 
Of the same measure; this they filled with wine, 
And bathed their spirits in delight. Unmeet 
I deem'd it to express offence at those 
Who entertain'd me, but in silence grieved, 
Showing a cheer as though I mark'd it not, 
And sigh'd for that I shed my mother's blood. 
A feast, I hear, at Athens is ordain'd 
From this my evil plight, ev'n yet observed, 
In which the equal-measured bowl then used 
Is by that people held in honour high. 
But when to the tribunal on the mount 
Of Mars I came, one stand I took, and one 
The eldest of the Furies opposite: 
The cause was heard touching my mother's blood, 
And Phoebus saved me by his evidence: 
Equal, by Pallas number'd, were the votes 
And I from doom of blood victorious freed 
Such of the Furies as there sat, appeased 
By the just sentence, nigh the court resolved 
To fix their seat; but others, whom the law 
Appeased not, with relentless tortures still 
Pursued me, till I reach'd the hallow'd soil 
Of Phoebus: stretch'd before his shrine, I swore 
Foodless to waste my wretched life away, 
Unless the god, by whom I was undone, 
Would save me: from the golden tripod burst 
The voice divine, and sent me to this shore, 
Commanding me to bear the image hence, 
Which fell from Jove, and in the Athenian land 
To fix it. What the oracular voice assign'd 
My safety, do thou aid: if we obtain 
The statue of the goddess, I no more 
With madness shall be tortured, but this arm 
Shall place thee in my bark, which ploughs the waves 
With many an oar, and to Mycenae safe 
Bear thee again. Show then a sister's love, 
O thou most dear; preserve thy father's house, 
Preserve me too; for me destruction waits, 
And all the race of Pelops, if we bear not 
This heaven-descended image from the shrine. 

LEADER The anger of the gods hath raged severe, 
And plunged the race of Tantalus in woes. 

IPHIGENIA Ere thy arrival here, a fond desire 
To be again at Argos, and to see 
Thee, my loved brother, fill'd my soul. Thy wish 
Is my warm wish, to free thee from thy toils, 
And from its ruins raise my father's house; 
Nor harbour I 'gainst him, that slew me, thought 
Of harsh resentment: from thy blood my hands 
Would I keep pure, thy house I would preserve. 
But from the goddess how may this be hid? 
The tyrant too I fear, when he shall find 
The statue on its marble base no more. 
What then from death will save me? What excuse 
Shall I devise? Yet by one daring deed 
Might these things be achieved: couldst thou bear hence 
The image, me too in thy gallant bark 
Placing secure, how glorious were the attempt! 
Me if thou join not with thee, I am lost 
Indeed; but thou, with prudent measures form'd, 
Return. I fly no danger, not ev'n death, 
Be death required, to save thee: no: the man 
Dying is mourn'd, as to his house a loss; 
But woman's weakness is of light esteem. 

ORESTES I would not be the murderer of my mother, 
And of thee too; sufficient is her blood. 
No; I will share thy fortune, live with thee, 
Or with thee die: to Argos I will lead thee, 
If here I perish not; or dying, here 
Remain with thee. But what my mind suggests, 
Hear: if Diana were averse to this, 
How could the voice of Phoebus from his shrine 
Declare that to the state of Pallas hence 
The statue of the goddess I should bear, 
And see thy face? All this, together weigh'd, 
Gives hope of fair success, and our return. 

IPHIGENIA But how effect it, that we neither die, 
And what we wish achieve? For our return 
On this depends: this claims deliberate thought. 

ORESTES Have we not means to work the tyrant's death? 

IPHIGENIA For strangers full of peril were the attempt.

ORESTES Thee would it save and me, it must be dared. 

IPHIGENIA I could not: yet thy promptness I approve. 

ORESTES What if thou lodge me in the shrine conceal'd? 

IPHIGENIA That in the shades of night we may escape? 

ORESTES Night is a friend to frauds, the light to truth.

IPHIGENIA Within are sacred guards; we 'scape not them.

ORESTES Ruin then waits us: how can we be saved? 

IPHIGENIA I think I have some new and safe device. 

ORESTES What is it? Let me know: impart thy thought, 

IPHIGENIA Thy sufferings for my purpose I will use,- 

ORESTES To form devices quick is woman's wit. 

IPHIGENIA And say, thy mother slain, thou fledd'st from Argos.

ORESTES If to aught good, avail thee of my ills. 

IPHIGENIA Unmeet then at this shrine to offer thee. 

ORESTES What cause alleged? I reach not thine intent. 

IPHIGENIA As now impure: when hallow'd, I will slay thee.

ORESTES How is the image thus more promptly gain'd? 

IPHIGENIA Thee I will hallow in the ocean waves. 

ORESTES The statue we would gain is in the temple. 

IPHIGENIA That, by thy touch polluted, I would cleanse.

ORESTES Where? On the watery margin of the main? 

IPHIGENIA Where thy tall bark secured with cables rides.

ORESTES And who shall bear the image in his hands? 

IPHIGENIA Myself; profaned by any touch, but mine. 

ORESTES What of this blood shall on my friend be charged?

IPHIGENIA His hands, it shall be said, like thine are stain'd.

ORESTES In secret this, or to the king disclosed? 

IPHIGENIA With his assent; I cannot hide it from him. 

ORESTES My bark with ready oars attends thee near. 

IPHIGENIA That all be well appointed, be thy charge. 

ORESTES One thing alone remains; that these conceal 
Our purpose: but address them, teach thy tongue 
Persuasive words: a woman hath the power 
To melt the heart to pity: thus perchance 
All things may to our warmest wish succeed. 

IPHIGENIA Ye train of females, to my soul most dear, 
On you mine eyes are turn'd, on you depends 
My fate; with prosperous fortune to be bless'd, 
Or to be nothing, to my country lost, 
Of a dear kinsman and a much-loved brother 
Deprived. This plea I first would urge, that we 
Are women, and have hearts by nature form'd 
To love each other, of our mutual trusts 
Most firm preservers. Touching our design, 
Be silent, and assist our flight: naught claims 
More honour than the faithful tongue. You see 
How the same fortune links us three, most dear 
Each to the other, to revisit safe 
Our country, or to die. If I am saved, 
That thou mayst share my fortune, I to Greece 
Will bring thee safe: but thee by this right hand, 
Thee I conjure, and thee; by this loved cheek 
Thee, by thy knees, by all that in your house 
Is dearest to you, father, mother, child, 
If you have children. What do you reply? 
Which of you speaks assent? Or which dissents? 
But be you all assenting: for my plea 
If you approve not, ruin falls on me, 
And my unhappy brother too must die. 

LEADER Be confident, loved lady and consult 
Only thy safety: all thou givest in charge, 
Be witness, mighty Jove, I will conceal. 

IPHIGENIA O, for this generous promise be you bless'd.  (To ORESTES
and PYLADES)  To enter now the temple be thy part, 
And thine: for soon the monarch of the land 
Will come, inquiring if the strangers yet 
Have bow'd their necks as victims at the shrine. 
Goddess revered, who in the dreadful bay 
Of Aulis from my father's slaughtering hand 
Didst save me; save me now, and these: through thee, 
Else will the voice of Phoebus be no more 
Held true by mortals. From this barbarous land 
To Athens go propitious: here to dwell 
Beseems thee not; thine be a polish'd state!  (ORESTES, PYLADES, and
IPHIGENIA enter the temple.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

O bird, that round each craggy height 
Projecting o'er the sea below, 
Wheelest thy melancholy flight, 
Thy song attuned to notes of woe; 
The wise thy tender sorrows own, 
Which thy lost lord unceasing moan; 
Like thine, sad halcyon, be my strain, 
A bird, that have no wings to fly: 
With fond desire for Greece I sigh, 
And for my much-loved social train; 
Sigh for Diana, pitying maid, 
Who joys to rove o'er Cynthus' heights. 
Or in the branching laurel's shade, 
Or in the soft-hair'd palm delights, 
Or the hoar olive's sacred boughs, 
Lenient of sad Latona's woes; 
Or in the lake, that rolls its wave 
Where swans their plumage love to lave; 
Then, to the Muses soaring high, 
The homage pay of melody. 

(antistrophe 1)

Ye tears, what frequent-falling showers 
Roll'd down these cheeks in streams of woe, 
When in the dust my country's towers 
Lay levell'd by the conquering foe; 
And, to their spears a prey, their oars 
Brought me to these barbaric shores! 
For gold exchanged, a traffic base, 
No vulgar slave, the task is mine, 
Here at Diana's awful shrine, 
Who loves the woodland hind to chase, 
The virgin priestess to attend, 
Daughter of rich Mycenae's lord; 
At other shrines her wish to bend, 
Where bleeds the victim less abhorr'd: 
No respite to her griefs she knows; 
Not so the heart inured to woes, 
As train'd to sorrow's rigid lore: 
Now comes a change; it mourns no more: 
But lo long bliss when ill succeeds, 
The anguish'd heart for ever bleeds. 

(strophe 2)

Thee, loved virgin, freed from fear 
Home the Argive bark shall bear: 
Mountain Pan, with thrilling strain, 
To the oars that dash the main 
In just cadence well agreed, 
Shall accord his wax-join'd reed: 
Phoebus, with a prophet's fire 
Sweeping o'er his seven-string'd lyre, 
And his voice attuning high 
To the swelling harmony, 
Thee shall guide the wild waves o'er 
To the soft Athenian shore. 
Leaving me, thy oars shall sweep 
Eager o'er the foaming deep: 
Thou shalt catch the rising gales 
Swelling in thy firm-bound sails; 
And thy bark in gallant pride 
Light shall o'er the billows glide. 

(antistrophe 2)

Might I through the lucid air 
Fly where rolls yon flaming car, 
O'er those loved and modest bowers, 
Where I pass'd my youthful hours, 
I would stay my weary flight, 
Wave no more my pennons light, 
But, amid the virgin band, 
Once my loved companions, stand: 
Once mid them my charms could move, 
Blooming then, the flames of love; 
When the mazy dance I trod, 
While with joy my mother glow'd; 
When to vie in grace was mine, 
And in splendid robes to shine; 
For, with radiant tints impress'd, 
Glow'd for me the gorgeous vest; 
And these tresses gave new grace, 
As their ringlets shade my face.  (THOAS and his retinue enter.)

THOAS Where is the Grecian lady, to whose charge 
This temple is committed? Have her rites 
Hallow'd the strangers? Do their bodies burn 
In the recesses of the sacred shrine? 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS She comes, and will inform thee, king, of all.
(IPHIGENIA comes out of the temple. She is carrying the sacred statue
of Diana.)  

THOAS Daughter of Agamemnon, what means this? 
The statue of the goddess in thine arms 
Why dost thou bear, from its firm base removed? 

IPHIGENIA There in the portal, monarch, stay thy step. 

THOAS What of strange import in the shrine hath chanced?

IPHIGENIA Things ominous: that word I, holy, speak. 

THOAS To what is tuned thy proem? Plainly speak. 

IPHIGENIA Not pure the victims, king, you lately seized.

THOAS What showd thee this? Or speak'st thou but thy thought?

IPHIGENIA Back turn'd the sacred image on its base. 

THOAS Spontaneous turn'd, or by an earthquake moved? 

IPHIGENIA Spontaneous, and, averted, closed its eyes. 

THOAS What was the cause? The blood-stain'd stranger's guilt?

IPHIGENIA That, and naught else; for horrible their deeds.

THOAS What, have they slain some Scythian on the shore?

IPHIGENIA They came polluted with domestic blood. 

THOAS What blood? I have a strong desire to know. 

IPHIGENIA They slew their mother with confederate swords.

THOAS O Phoebus! This hath no barbarian dared. 

IPHIGENIA All Greece indignant chased them from her realms.

THOAS Bear'st thou for this the image from the shrine? 

IPHIGENIA To the pure air, from stain of blood removed.

THOAS By what means didst thou know the stranger's guilt?

IPHIGENIA I learn'd it as the statue started back. 

THOAS Greece train'd thee wise: this well hast thou discern'd.

IPHIGENIA Now with sweet blandishments they soothe my soul.

THOAS Some glozing tale from Argos telling thee? 

IPHIGENIA I have one brother: he, they say, lives happy,-

THOAS That thou mayst save them for their pleasing news?

IPHIGENIA And that my father lives, by fortune bless'd.

THOAS But on the goddess well thy thoughts are turn'd. 

IPHIGENIA I hate all Greece; for it hath ruin'd me. 

THOAS What with the strangers, say then, should be done?

IPHIGENIA The law ordain'd in reverence we must hold. 

THOAS Are then thy lavers ready, and the sword? 

IPHIGENIA First I would cleanse them with ablutions pure.

THOAS In fountain waters, or the ocean wave? 

IPHIGENIA All man's pollutions doth the salt sea cleanse.

THOAS More holy to the goddess will they bleed. 

IPHIGENIA And better what I have in charge advance. 

THOAS Doth not the wave ev'n 'gainst the temple beat? 

IPHIGENIA This requires solitude: more must I do. 

THOAS Lead where thou wilt: on secret rite I pry not. 

IPHIGENIA The image of the goddess I must cleanse. 

THOAS If it be stain'd with touch of mother's blood. 

IPHIGENIA I could not else have borne it from its base.

THOAS Just is thy provident and pious thought; 
For this by all the state thou art revered. 

IPHIGENIA Know'st thou what next I would? 

THOAS 'Tis thine thy will 
To signify. 

IPHIGENIA Give for these strangers chains. 

THOAS To what place can they fly? 

IPHIGENIA A Grecian knows 
Naught faithful. 

THOAS Of my train go some for chains.  (Some attendants go out.)

IPHIGENIA Let them lead forth the strangers. 

THOAS Be it so, 

IPHIGENIA And veil their faces. 

THOAS From the sun's bright beams? 

IPHIGENIA Some of thy train send with me. 

THOAS These shall go, 
Attending thee. 

IPHIGENIA One to the city send. 

THOAS With what instructions charged? 

IPHIGENIA That all remain 
Within their houses. 

THOAS That the stain of blood 
They meet not? 

IPHIGENIA These things have pollution in them. 

THOAS Go thou, and bear the instructions.  (An attendant departs.)

IPHIGENIA That none come 
In sight, 

THOAS How wisely careful for the city! 

IPHIGENIA Warn our friends most. 

THOAS This speaks thy care for me. 

IPHIGENIA Stay thou before the shrine. 

THOAS To what intent? 

IPHIGENIA Cleanse it with lustral fires. 

THOAS That thy return 
May find it pure? 

IPHIGENIA But when the strangers come 
Forth from the temple,- 

THOAS What must I then do? 

IPHIGENIA Spread o'er thine eyes a veil. 

THOAS That I receive not 
Pollution? 

IPHIGENIA Tedious if my stay appear,- 

THOAS What bounds may be assign'd? 

IPHIGENIA Deem it not strange. 

THOAS At leisure what the rites require perform. 

IPHIGENIA May this lustration as I wish succeed! 

THOAS Thy wish is mine.  (ORESTES and PYLADES, bound, are led from
the temple in solemn procession by the guards. THOAS and his retinue
veil their heads as it slowly moves past.)  

IPHIGENIA  (chanting) But from the temple, see, 
The strangers come, the sacred ornaments, 
The hallow'd lambs-for I with blood must wash 
This execrable blood away,-the light 
Of torches, and what else my rites require 
To purify these strangers to the goddess. 
But to the natives of this land my voice 
Proclaims, from this pollution far remove, 
Art thou attendant at the shrine, who liftest 
Pure to the gods thy hands, or nuptial rites 
Dost thou prepare, or pregnant matron; hence, 
Begone, that this defilement none may touch. 
Thou, daughter of Latona and high Jove, 
O royal virgin, if I cleanse the stain 
Of these, and where I ought with holy rites 
Address thee, thou shalt hold thy residence 
In a pure mansion; we too shall be bless'd. 
More though I speak not, goddess, unexpress'd, 
All things to thee and to the gods are known.  (IPHIGENIA, carrying
the statue, joins the procession as is goes out. THOAS and his retinue
enter the temple.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Latona's glorious offspring claims the song, 
Born the hallow'd shades among, 
Where fruitful Delos winds her valleys low; 
Bright-hair'd Phoebus, skill'd to inspire 
Raptures, as he sweeps the lyre, 
And she that glories in the unerring bow. 
From the rocky ridges steep, 
At whose feet the hush'd waves sleep, 
Left their far-famed native shore, 
Them the exulting mother bore 
To Parnassus, on whose heights 
Bacchus shouting holds his rites; 
Glittering in the burnish'd shade, 
By the laurel's branches made, 
Where the enormous dragon lies, 
Brass his scales, and flame his eyes, 
Earth-born monster, that around 
Rolling guards the oracular ground; 
Him, while yet a sportive child, 
In his mother's arms that smiled, 
Phoebus slew, and seized the shrine 
Whence proceeds the voice divine: 
On the golden tripod placed, 
Throne by falsehood ne'er disgraced, 
Where Castalia's pure stream flows, 
He the fates to mortal shows. 

(antistrophe)

But when Themis, whom of yore 
Earth, her fruitful mother, bore, 
From her hallow'd seat he drove, 
Earth to avenge her daughter strove, 
Forming visions of the night, 
Which, in rapt dreams hovering light, 
All that Time's dark volumes hold 
Might to mortal sense unfold, 
When in midnight's sable shades 
Sleep the silent couch invades: 
Thus did Earth her vengeance boast. 
His prophetic honours lost, 
Royal Phoebus speeds his flight 
To Olympus, on whose height 
At the throne of Jove he stands, 
Stretching forth his little hands, 
Suppliant that the Pythian shrine 
Feel no more the wrath divine; 
That the goddess he appease; 
That her nightly visions cease. 
Jove with smiles beheld his son 
Early thus address his throne, 
Suing with ambitious pride 
O'er the rich shrine to preside; 
He, assenting, bow'd his head. 
Straight the nightly visions fled; 
And prophetic dreams no more 
Hover'd slumbering mortals o'er: 
Now to Phoebus given again, 
All his honours pure remain; 
Votaries distant regions send 
His frequented throne to attend: 
And the firm decrees of fate 
On his faithful voice await.  (A MESSENGER enters.)  

MESSENGER Say you, that keep the temple, and attend 
The altar, where is Thoas, Scythia's king? 
Open these strong-compacted gates, and cal 
Forth from the shrine the monarch of the land. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Wherefore? at thy command if I must speak.

MESSENGER The two young men are gone, through the device

Of Agamemnon's daughter: from this land 
They fly; and, in their Grecian galley placed, 
The sacred image of the goddess bear. 

LEADER Incredible thy tale: but whom thou seek'st, 
The monarch, from the temple went in haste. 

MESSENGER Whither? for what is doing he should know. 

LEADER We know not: but go thou, and seek for him: 
Where'er thou find him, thou wilt tell him this. 

MESSENGER See, what a faithless race you women are! 
In all that hath been done you have a part. 

LEADER Sure thou art mad! what with the strangers' flight

Have we to do? But wilt thou not, with all 
The speed thou mayst, go to the monarch's house? 

MESSENGER Not till I first am well inform'd, if here 
Within the temple be the king, or not.  (Shouting)  Unbar the gates
(to you within I speak); 
And tell your lord that at the portal here 
I stand, and bring him tidings of fresh ills.  (THOAS and his attendants
enter from the temple.)  

THOAS Who at the temple of the goddess dares 
This clamour raise, and, thundering at the gates, 
Strikes terror through the ample space within? 

MESSENGER With falsehoods would these women drive me hence,

Without to seek thee: thou wast in the shrine. 

THOAS With what intent? or what advantage sought? 

MESSENGER Of these hereafter; what more urgent now 
Imports thee, hear: the virgin, in this place 
Presiding at the altars, from this land 
Is with the strangers fled, and bears with her 
The sacred image of the goddess; all 
Of her ablutions but a false pretence. 

THOAS How say'st thou? What is her accursed design? 

MESSENGER To save Orestes: this too will amaze thee. 

THOAS Whom? What Orestes? Clytemnestra's son? 

MESSENGER Him at the altar hallow'd now to bleed. 

THOAS Portentous! for what less can it be call'd? 

MESSENGER Think not on that, but hear me; with deep thought

Reflect: weigh well what thou shalt hear; devise 
By what pursuit to reach and seize the strangers. 

THOAS Speak: thou advisest well: the sea though nigh, 
They fly not so as to escape my spear. 

MESSENGER When to the shore we came, where station'd rode

The galley of Orestes, by the rocks 
Conceal'd to us, whom thou hadst sent with her 
To hold the strangers' chains, the royal maid 
Made signs that we retire, and stand aloof, 
As if with secret rites she would perform 
The purposed expiation: on she went, 
In her own hands holding the strangers' chains 
Behind them: not without suspicion-this, 
Yet by thy servants, king, allow'd. At length, 
That we might deem her in some purpose high 
Employ'd, she raised her voice, and chanted loud 
Barbaric strains, as if with mystic rites 
She cleansed the stain of blood. When we had sat 
A tedious while, it came into our thought, 
That from their chains unloosed, the stranger youths 
Might kill her, and escape by flight: yet fear 
Of seeing what we ought not, kept us still 
In silence; but at length we all resolved 
To go, though not permitted, where they were. 
There we behold the Grecian bark with oars 
Well furnish'd, wing'd for flight; and at their seats, 
Grasping their oars, were fifty rowers; free 
From chains beside the stern the two youths stood 
Some from the prow relieved the keel with poles; 
Some weigh'd the anchors up; the climbing ropes 
Some hasten'd, through their hands the cables drew, 
Launch'd the light bark, and gave her to the main. 
But when we saw their treacherous wiles, we rush'd 
Heedless of danger, seized the priestess, seized 
The halsers, hung upon the helm, and strove 
To rend the rudder-bands away. Debate 
Now rose:-"What mean you, sailing o'er the seas, 
The statue and the priestess from the land 
By stealth conveying? Whence art thou, and who, 
That bear'st her, like a purchased slave, away?" 
He said, "I am her brother; be of this 
Inform'd; Orestes, son of Agamemnon: 
My sister, so long lost, I bear away, 
Recover'd here." But naught the less for that 
Held we the priestess, and by force would lead 
Again to thee: hence dreadful on our cheeks 
The blows; for in their hands no sword they held, 
Nor we; but many a rattling stroke the youths 
Dealt witb their fists, against our sides and breasts 
Their arms fierce darting, till our batter'd limbs 
Were all disabled: now with dreadful marks 
Disfigured, up the precipice we fly, 
Some bearing on their heads, some in their eyes 
The bloody bruises: standing on the heights, 
Our fight was safer, and we hurl'd at them 
Fragments of rocks; but, standing on the stern, 
The archers with their arrows drove us thence; 
And now a swelling wave roll'd in, which drove 
The galley towards the land. The sailors fear'd 
The sudden swell: on his left arm sustain'd, 
Orestes bore his sister through the tide, 
Mounted the bark's tall side, and on the deck 
Safe placed her, and Diana's holy image, 
Which fell from heaven; from the midship his voice 
He sent aloud:-"Ye youths, that in this bark 
From Argos plough'd the deep, now ply your oars, 
And dash the billows till they foam: those things 
Are ours, for which we swept the Euxine sea. 
And steer'd our course within its clashing rocks." 
They gave a cheerful shout, and with their oars 
Dash'd the salt wave. The galley, while it rode 
Within the harbour, work'd its easy way; 
But having pass'd its mouth, the swelling flood 
Roll'd on it, and with sudden force the wind 
Impetuous rising drove it back: their oars 
They slack'd not, stoutly struggling 'gainst the wave; 
But towards the land the refluent flood impell'd 
The galley: then the royal virgin stood, 
And pray'd:-"O daughter of Latona, save me, 
Thy priestess save; from this barbaric land 
To Greece restore me, and forgive my thefts: 
For thou, O goddess, dost thy brother love, 
Deem then that I love those allied to me." 
The mariners responsive to her prayer 
Shouted loud paeans, and their naked arms, 
Each cheering each, to their stout oars apply. 
But nearer and yet nearer to the rock 
The galley drove: some rush'd into the sea, 
Some strain'd the ropes that bind the loosen'd sails. 
Straight was I hither sent to thee, O king, 
To inform thee of these accidents. But haste, 
Take chains and gyves with thee: for if the flood side not to a calm,
there is no hope 
Of safety to the strangers. Be assured, 
That Neptune, awful monarch of the main, 
Remembers Troy; and, hostile to the race 
Of Pelops, will deliver to thy hands, 
And to thy people, as is meet, the son 
Of Agamemnon; and bring back to the 
His sister, who the goddess hath betray'd, 
Unmindful of the blood at Aulis shed. 

LEADER Unhappy Iphigenia, thou must die, 
Thy brother too must die, if thou again, 
Seized in thy flight, to thy lord's hands shalt come. 

THOAS Inhabitants of this barbaric land, 
Will you not rein your steeds, will you not fly 
Along the shore, to seize whate'er this skiff 
Of Greece casts forth; and, for your goddess roused, 
Hunt down these impious men? Will you not launch 
Instant your swift-oar'd barks, by sea, by land 
To catch them, from the rugged rock to hurl 
Their bodies, or impale them on the stake? 
But for you, women, in these dark designs 
Accomplices, hereafter, as I find 
Convenient leisure, I will punish you. 
The occasion urges now, and gives no pause.  (MINERVA appears above.)

MINERVA Whither, O royal Thoas, dost thou lead 
This vengeful chase? Attend: Minerva speaks. 
Cease thy pursuit, and stop this rushing flood 
Of arms; for hither, by the fateful voice 
Of Phoebus, came Orestes, warn'd to fly 
The anger of the Furies, to convey 
His sister to her native Argos back, 
And to my land the sacred image bear. 
Thoas, I speak to thee: him, whom thy rage 
Would kill, Orestes, on the wild waves seized, 
Neptune, to do me grace, already wafts 
On the smooth sea, the swelling surges calm'd. 
And thou, Orestes (for my voice thou hear'st, 
Though distant far), to my commands attend: 
Go, with the sacred image, which thou bear'st, 
And with thy sister: but when thou shalt come 
To Athens built by gods, there is a place 
On the extreme borders of the Attic land, 
Close neighbouring to Carystia's craggy height, 
Sacred; my people call it Alae: there 
A temple raise, and fix the statue there, 
Which from the Tauric goddess shall receive 
Its name, and from thy toils, which thou, through Greece

Driven by the Furies' maddening stings, hast borne; 
And mortals shall in future times with hymns 
The Tauric goddess there, Diana, hail. 
And be this law establish'd; when the feast 
For thy deliverance from this shrine is held, 
To a man's throat that they apply the sword, 
And draw the blood, in memory of these rites, 
That of her honours naught the goddess lose. 
Thou, Iphigenia, on the hallow'd heights 
Of Brauron on this goddess shalt attend 
Her priestess, dying shalt be there interr'd, 
Graced with the honours of the gorgeous vests 
Of finest texture, in their houses left 
By matrons who in childbed pangs expired. 
These Grecian dames back to their country lead, 
I charge thee; justice this return demands, 
For I saved thee, when on the mount of Mars 
The votes were equal; and from that decree 
The shells in number equal still absolve. 
But, son of Agamemnon, from this land 
Thy sister bear; nor, Thoas, be thou angry. 

THOAS Royal Minerva, he that hears the gods 
Commanding, and obeys not, is unwise. 
My anger 'gainst Orestes flames no more, 
Gone though he be, and bears with him away 
The statue of the goddess, and his sister. 
Have mortals glory 'gainst the powerful gods 
Contending? Let them go, and to thy land 
The sacred image bear, and fix it there; 
Good fortune go with them. To favour Greece, 
These dames, at thy high bidding, I will send. 
My arms will I restrain, which I had raised 
Against the strangers, and my swift-oar'd barks, 
Since, potent goddess, this is pleasing to thee. 

MINERVA I praise thy resolution; for the power 
Of Fate o'er thee and o'er the gods prevails. 
Breathe soft, ye favouring gales, to Athens bear 
These sprung from Agamemnon; on their course 
Attending, I will go, and heedful save 
My sister's sacred image. You too go  (to the CHORUS)  Prosperous,
and in the fate that guards you bless'd.  (MINERVA vanishes.)

CHORUS  (chanting) O thou, among the immortal gods revered

And mortal men, Minerva, we will do 
As thou commandest; for with transport high, 
Exceeding hope, our ears receive thy words. 

O Victory, I revere thy awful power: 
Guard thou my life, nor ever cease to crown me! 

THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

The sea-coast at Aulis. Enter AGAMEMNON and ATTENDANT.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

AGAMEMNON Old man, come hither and stand before my dwelling.

ATTENDANT I come; what new schemes now, king Agamemnon?

AGAMEMNON Thou shalt hear. 

ATTENDANT I am all eagerness. 'Tis little enough sleep old age allows
me and keenly it watches o'er my eyes. 

AGAMEMNON What can that star be, steering his course yonder?

ATTENDANT Sirius, still shooting o'er the zenith on his way near
the Pleiads' sevenfold track. 

AGAMEMNON The birds are still at any rate and the sea is calm; hushed
are the winds, and silence broods o'er this narrow firth.

ATTENDANT Then why art thou outside thy tent, why so restless, my
lord Agamemnon? All is yet quiet here in Aulis, the watch on the walls
is not yet astir. Let us go in. 

AGAMEMNON I envy thee, old man, aye, and every man who leads a life
secure, unknown and unrenowned; but little I envy those in office.

ATTENDANT And yet 'tis there we place the be-all and end-all of existence.

AGAMEMNON Aye, but that is where the danger comes; and ambition,
sweet though it seems, brings sorrow with its near approach. At one
time the unsatisfied claims of Heaven upset our life, at another the
numerous peevish fancies of our subjects shatter it. 

ATTENDANT I like not these sentiments in one who is a chief. It was
not to enjoy all blessings that Atreus begot thee, O Agamemnon; but
thou must needs experience joy and sorrow alike, mortal as thou art.
E'en though thou like it not, this is what the gods decree; but thou,
after letting thy taper spread its light abroad, writest the letter
which is still in thy hands and then erasest the same words again,
sealing and re-opening the scroll, then flinging the tablet to the
ground with floods of tears and leaving nothing undone in thy aimless
behaviour to stamp thee mad. What is it troubles thee? what news is
there affecting thee, my liege? Come, share with me thy story; to
a loyal and trusty heart wilt thou be telling it; for Tyndareus sent
me that day to form part of thy wife's dowry and to wait upon the
bride with loyalty. 

AGAMEMNON Leda, the daughter of Thestius, had three children, maidens,
Phoebe, Clytaemnestra my wife, and Helen; this last it was who had
for wooers the foremost of the favoured sons of Hellas; but terrible
threats of spilling his rival's blood were uttered by each of them,
should he fail to win the maid. Now the matter filled Tyndareus, her
father, with perplexity; at length this thought occurred to him; the
suitors should swear unto each other and join right hands thereon
and pour libations with burnt sacrifice, binding themselves by this
curse, "Whoever wins the child of Tyndareus for wife, him will we
assist, in case a rival takes her from his house and goes his way,
robbing her husband of his rights; and we will march against that
man in armed array and raze his city to the ground, Hellene no less
than barbarian." 

Now when they had once pledged their word and old Tyndareus with no
small cleverness had beguiled them by his shrewd device, he allowed
his daughter to choose from among her suitors the one towards whom
the breath of love might fondly waft her. Her choice fell on Menelaus;
would she had never taken him! Anon there came to Lacedaemon from
Phrygia's folk the man who, legend says, adjudged the goddesses' dispute;
in robes of gorgeous hue, ablaze with gold, in true barbaric pomp;
and he, finding Menelaus gone from home, carried Helen off with him
to his steading on Ida, a willing paramour. Goaded to frenzy Menelaus
flew through Hellas, invoking the ancient oath exacted by Tyndareus
and declaring the duty of helping the injured husband. Whereat the
chivalry of Hellas, brandishing their spears and donning their harness,
came hither to the narrow straits of Aulis with armaments of ships
and troops, with many a steed and many a car, and they chose me to
captain them all for the sake of Menelaus, since I was his brother.
Would that some other had gained that distinction instead of me! But
after the army was gathered and come together, we still remained at
Aulis weather-bound; and Calchas, the seer, bade us in our perplexity
sacrifice my own begotten child Iphigenia to Artemis, whose home is
in this land, declaring that if we offered her, we should sail and
sack the Phrygians' capital, but if we forbore, this was not for us.
When I heard this, I commanded Talthybius with loud proclamation to
disband the whole host, as I could never bear to slay daughter of
mine. Whereupon my brother, bringing every argument to bear, persuaded
me at last to face the crime; so I wrote in a folded scroll and sent
to my wife, bidding her despatch our daughter to me on the pretence
of wedding Achilles, it the same time magnifying his exalted rank
and saying that he refused to sail with the Achaeans, unless a bride
of our lineage should go to Phthia. Yes, this was the inducement I
offered my wife, inventing, as I did, a sham marriage for the maiden.
Of all the Achaeans we alone know the real truth, Calchas, Odysseus,
Menelaus and myself; but that which I then decided wrongly, I now
rightly countermand again in this scroll, which thou, old man, hast
found me opening and resealing beneath the shade of night. Up now
and away with this missive to Argos, and I will tell thee by word
of mouth all that is written herein, the contents of the folded scroll,
for thou art loyal to my wife and house. 

ATTENDANT Say on and make it plain, that what my tongue utters may
accord with what thou hast written. 

AGAMEMNON "Daughter of Leda, in addition to my first letter I now
send thee word not to despatch thy daughter to Euboea's embosomed
wing, to the to the waveless bay of Aulis; for after all we wiltlelebrate
our child's wedding at another time." 

ATTENDANT And how will Achilles, cheated of his bride, curb the fury
of his indignation against thee and thy wife? 

AGAMEMNON Here also is a danger. 

ATTENDANT Tell me what thou meanest. 

AGAMEMNON It is but his name, not himself, that Achilles is lending,
knowing nothing of the marriage or of my scheming or my professed
readiness to betroth my daughter to him for a husband's embrace.

ATTENDANT A dreadful venture thine king Agamemnon! thou that, by
promise of thy daughter's hand to the son of the goddess, wert for
bringing the maid hither to be sacrificed for the Danai.

AGAMEMNON Woe is me! ah woe! I am utterly distraught; bewilderment
comes o'er me. Away hurry thy steps, yielding nothing to old age.

ATTENDANT In haste I go, my liege. 

AGAMEMNON Sit not down by woodland founts; scorn the witcheries of
sleep. 

ATTENDANT Hush! 

AGAMEMNON And when thou passest any place where roads diverge, cast
thine eyes all round,-taking heed that no mule-wain pass by on rolling
wheels, bearing my daughter hither to the ships of the Danai, and
thou see it not. 

ATTENDANT It shall be so. 

AGAMEMNON Start then from the bolted gates, and if thou meet the
escort, start them back again, and drive at full speed to the abodes
of the Cyclopes. 

ATTENDANT But tell me, how shall my message find credit with thy
wife or child? 

AGAMEMNON Preserve the seal which thou bearest on this scroll. Away!
already the dawn is growing grey, lighting the lamp of day yonder
and the fire of the sun's four steeds; help me in my trouble.  (Exit
ATTENDANT.)  None of mortals is prosperous or happy to the last, for
none was ever born to a painless life.  (Exit AGAMEMNON., Enter
CHORUS OF WOMEN OF CHALCIS.)  

CHORUS To the sandy beach of sea-coast Aulis I came after a voyage
through the tides of Euripus, leaving Chalcis on its narrow firth,
my city which feedeth the waters of far-famed Arethusa near the sea,
that I might behold the army of the Achaeans and the ships rowed by
those god-like heroes; for our husbands tell us that fair-haired Menelaus
and high-born Agamemnon are leading them to Troy on a thousand ships
in quest of the lady Helen, whom herdsman Paris carried off from the
banks of reedy Eurotas-his guerdon from Aphrodite, when that queen
of Cyprus entered beauty's lists with Hera and Pallas at the gushing
fount. 

Through the grove of-Artemis, rich with sacrifice, I sped my course,
the red blush mantling on my cheeks from maiden modesty, in my eagerness
to see the soldiers' camp, the tents of the mail-clad Danai, and their
gathered steeds. Two chieftains there I saw met together in council;
one was Aias, son of Oileus; the other Aias, son of Telamon, crown
of glory to the men of Salamis; and I saw Protesilaus and Palamedes,
sprung from the son of Poseidon, sitting there amusing themselves
with intricate figures at draughts; Diomedes too at his favourite
sport of hurling quoits; and Meriones, the War-god's son, a marvel
to mankind, stood at his side; likewise I beheld the offspring of
Laertes, who came from his island hills, and with him Nireus, handsomest
of all Achaeans; Achilles next, that nimble runner, swift on his feet
as the wind, whom Thetis bore and Chiron trained; him I saw upon the
beach, racing in full armour along the shingle and straining every
nerve to beat a team of four horses, as he sped round the track on
foot; and Eumelus, the grandson of Pheres, their driver, was shouting
when I saw him. goading on his goodly steeds, with their bits of chased
goldwork; whereof the centre pair, that bore the yoke, had dappled
coats picked out with white, while the trace-horses, on the outside,
facing the turning-post in the course, were bays with spotted fetlocks.
Close beside them Peleus' son leapt on his way, in all his harness,
keeping abreast the rail by the axle-box. 

Next I sought the countless fleet, a wonder to behold, that I might
fill my girlish eyes with gazing, a sweet delight. 'the warlike Myrmidons
from Phthia held the right wing with fifty swift cruisers, upon whose
sterns, right at the ends, stood Nereid goddesses in golden-effigy,
the ensign of Achilles' armament. Near these were moored the Argive
ships in equal numbers, o'er which Mecisteus' son, whom Taulaus his
grandsire reared, and Sthenelus, son of Capaneus, were in command;
next in order, Theseus' son was stationed at the head of sixty ships
from Attica, having the goddess Pallas set in a winged car drawn by
steeds with solid hoof, a lucky sight for mariners. Then I saw Boeotia's
fleet of fifty sails decked with ensigns; these had Cadmus at the
stern holding a golden dragon at the beaks of the vessels, and earth-born
Leitus was their admiral. Likewise there were ships from Phocis; and
from Locris came the son of Oileus with an equal contingent, leaving
famed Thronium's citadel; and from Mycenae, the Cyclopes' town, Atreus'
son sent a hundred wellmanned galleys, his brother being with him
in command, as friend with friend, that Hellas might exact on her,
who had fled her home to wed a foreigner. Also I saw upon Gerenian
Nestor's prows twelve from Pylos the sign of his neighbor Alpheus,
four-footed like a bull. Moreover there was a squadron of Aenianian
sail under King and next the lords of Elis, stationed near'-them,
whom all the people named Epeians; and Eurytus was lord of these;
likewise he led the Taphian warriors with the white oar-blades, the
subjects of Meges, son of Phyleus, who had left the isles of the Echinades,
where sailors cannot land. Lastly, Aias, reared in Salamis, was joining
his right wing to the left of those near whom he was posted, closing
the line with his outermost ships-twelve barques obedient to the helm-as
I heard and then saw the crews; no safe return shall he obtain, who
bringeth his barbaric boats to grapple Aias. There I saw the naval
armament, but some things I heard at home about the gathered host,
whereof I still have a recollection.  (Enter MENELAUS and ATTENDANT.)

ATTENDANT  (As MENELAUS wrests a letter from him) Strange daring
thine, Menelaus, where thou hast no right. 

MENELAUS Stand back! thou carriest loyalty to thy master too far.

ATTENDANT The very reproach thou hast for me is to my credit.

MENELAUS Thou shalt rue it, if thou meddle in matters that concern
thee not. 

ATTENDANT Thou hadst no right to open a letter, which I was carrying.

MENELAUS No, nor thou to be carrying sorrow to all Hellas.

ATTENDANT Argue that point with others, but surrender that letter
to me. 

MENELAUS I shall not let go. 

ATTENDANT Nor yet will I let loose my hold. 

MENELAUS Why then, this staff of mine will be dabbling thy head with
blood ere long. 

ATTENDANT To die in my master's cause were a noble death.

MENELAUS Let go! thou art too wordy for a slave. 

ATTENDANT  (Seeing AGAMEMNON approaching) Master, he is wronging
me; he snatched thy letter violently from my grasp, Agamemnon, and
will not heed the claims of right.  (Enter AGAMEMNON.)  

AGAMEMNON How now? what means this uproar at the gates, this indecent
brawling? 

MENELAUS My tale, not his, has the better right to be spoken.

AGAMEMNON Thou, Menelaus! what quarrel hast thou with this man, why
art thou haling him hence?  (Exit ATTENDANT.)  

MENELAUS Look me in the face! Be that the prelude to my story.

AGAMEMNON Shall I, the son of Atreus, close my eyes from fear?

MENELAUS Seest thou this scroll, the bearer of a shameful message?

AGAMEMNON I see it, yes; and first of all surrender it.

MENELAUS No, not till I have shewn its contents to all the Danai.

AGAMEMNON What! hast thou broken the seal and dost know already what
thou shouldst never have known? 

MENELAUS Yes, I opened it and know to thy sorrow the secret machinations
of thy heart. 

AGAMEMNON Where didst thou catch my servant? Ye gods what a shameless
heart thou hast! 

MENELAUS I was awaiting thy daughter's arrival at the camp from Argos.

AGAMEMNON What right hast thou to watch my doings? Is not this a
of shamelessness? 

MENELAUS My wish to do it gave the spur, for I am no slave to thee.

AGAMEMNON Infamous! Am I not to be allowed the management of my own
house? 

MENELAUS No, for thou thinkest crooked thoughts, one thing now, another
formerly, and something different presently. 

AGAMEMNON Most exquisite refining on evil themes! A hateful thing
the tongue of cleverness! 

MENELAUS Aye, but a mind unstable is an unjust possession, disloyal
to friends. Now I am anxious to test thee, and seek not thou from
rage to turn aside from the truth, nor will I on my part overstrain
the case. Thou rememberest when thou wert all eagerness to captain
the Danai against Troy, making a pretence of declining, though eager
for it in thy heart; how humble thou wert then! taking each man by
the hand and keeping open doors for every fellow townsman who cared
to enter, affording each in turn a chance to speak with thee, even
though some desired it not, seeking by these methods to purchase popularity
from all bidders; then when thou hadst secured the command, there
came a change over thy manners; thou wert no longer so cordial before
to whilom friends, but hard of access, seldom to be found at home.
But the man of real worth ought not to change his manners in the hour
of prosperity, but should then show himself most staunch to friends,
when his own good fortune can help them most effectually. This was
the first cause I had to reprove thee, for it was here I first discovered
thy villainy; but afterwards, when thou camest to Aulis with all the
gathered hosts of Hellas, thou wert of no account; no! the want of
a favourable breeze filled thee with consternation at the chance dealt
out by Heaven. Anon the Danai began demanding that thou shouldst send
the fleet away instead of vainly toiling on at Aulis; what dismay
and confusion was then depicted in thy looks, to think that thou,
with a thousand ships at thy command, hadst not occupied the plains
of Priam with thy armies! And thou wouldst ask my counsel, "What am
I to do? what scheme can I devise. where find one?" to save thyself
being stripped of thy command and losing thy fair fame. Next when
Calchas bade thee offer thy daughter in sacrifice to Artemis, declaring
that the Danai should then sail, thou wert overjoyed, and didst gladly
undertake to offer the maid, and of thine own accord-never allege
compulsion!-thou art sending word to thy wife to despatch thy daughter
hither on pretence of wedding Achilles. This is the same air that
heard thee say it; and after all thou turnest round and hast been
caught recasting thy letter to this effect, "I will no longer be my
daughter's murderer." Exactly so! Countless others have gone through
this phase in their conduct of public affairs; they make an effort
while in power, and then retire dishonourably, sometimes owing to
the senselessness of the citizens, sometimes deservedly, because they
are too feeble of themselves to maintain their watch upon the state.
For my part, I am more sorry for our unhappy Hellas, whose purpose
was to read these worthless foreigners a lesson, while now she will
let them escape and mock her, thanks to thee and thy daughter. May
I never then appoint a man to rule my country or lead its warriors
because his kinship! Ability what the general must have; since any
man, with ordinary intelligence, can govern a state. 

CHORUS For brethren to come to words and blows, whene'er they disagree,
is terrible. 

AGAMEMNON I wish to rebuke thee in turn, briefly, not lifting mine
eyes too high in shameless wise, but in more sober fashion, as a brother;
for it is a good man's way to be considerate. Prithee, why this burst
of fury, these bloodshot eyes? who wrongs thee? what is it thou wantest?
Thou art fain to win a virtuous bride. Well, I cannot supply thee;
for she, whom thou once hadst, was ill controlled by thee. Am I then,
a man who never went astray, to suffer for thy sins? or is it my popularity
that galls thee? No! it is the longing thou hast to keep a fair wife
in thy embrace, casting reason and honour to the winds. A bad man's
pleasures are like himself Am I mad, if I change to wiser counsels,
after previously deciding amiss? Thine is the madness rather in wishing
to recover a wicked wife, once thou hadst lost her-a stroke of Heaven-sent
luck. Those foolish suitors swore that oath to Tyndareus in their
longing to wed; but Hope was the goddess that led them on, I trow,
and she it was that brought it about rather then thou and thy mightiness.
So take the field with them; they are ready for it in the folly of
their hearts; for the deity is not without insight, but is able to
discern where oaths have been wrongly pledged or forcibly extorted.
I will not slay my children, nor shall thy interests be prospered
by justice in thy vengeance for a worthless wife, while I am left
wasting, night and day, in sorrow for what I did to one of my own
flesh and blood, contrary to all law and justice. There is thy answer
shortly' given, clear and easy to understand; and if thou wilt not
come to thy senses, I shall do the best for myself. 

CHORUS This differs from thy previous declaration, but there is good
in it-thy child's reprieve. 

MENELAUS Ah me, how sad my lot! I have no friends then after all.

AGAMEMNON Friends thou hast, if thou seek not their destruction.

MENELAUS Where wilt thou find any proof that thou art sprung from
the same sire as I? 

AGAMEMNON Thy moderation, not thy madness do I share by nature.

MENELAUS Friends should sympathize with friends in sorrow.

AGAMEMNON Claim my help by kindly service, not by paining me.

MENELAUS So thou hast no mind to share this trouble with Hellas?

AGAMEMNON No, Hellas is diseased like thee according to some god's
design. 

MENELAUS Go vaunt thee then on thy sceptre, after betraying thine
own brother! while seek some different means and other friends.  (Enter
MESSENGER.)  

MESSENGER Agamemnon, lord of all Hellenes! I am come and bring thee
thy daughter, whom thou didst call Iphigenia in thy home; and her
mother, thy wife Clytemnestra, is with her, and the child Orestes,
a sight to gladden thee after thy long absence from thy palace; but,
as they had been travelling long and far, they are now refreshing
their tender feet at the waters of a fair spring, they and their horses,
for we turned these loose in the grassy meadow to browse their fill;
but I am come as their forerunner to prepare thee for their reception;
for the army knows already of thy daughter's arrival, so quickly did
the rumour spread; and all the folk are running together to the sight,
that they may see thy child; for Fortune's favourites enjoy a worldwide
fame and have all eyes fixed on them. "Is it a wedding?" some ask,
"or what is happening? or has king Agamemnon from fond yearning summoned
his daughter hither?" From others thou wouldst have heard: "They are
presenting the maiden to Artemis, queen of Aulis, previous to marriage;
who can the bridegroom be, that is to lead her home?" 

Come, then, begin the rites-that is the next step-by getting the baskets
ready; crown your heads; prepare the wedding-hymn, thou and prince
Menelaus with thee; let flutes resound throughout the tents with noise
of dancer's feet; for this is a happy day, that is come for the maid.

AGAMEMNON Thou hast my thanks; now go within; for the rest it will
be well, as Fate proceeds.  (Exit MESSENGER.)  Ah, woe is me! unhappy
wretch, what can I say? where shall I begin? Into what cruel straits
have I been plunged! Fortune has outwitted me, proving far cleverer
than any cunning of mine. What an advantage humble birth possesses!
for it is easy for her sons to weep and tell out all their sorrows;
while to the high-born man come these same sorrows, but we have dignity
throned o'er our life and are the people's slaves. I, for instance,
am ashamed to weep, nor less, poor wretch, to check my tears at the
awful pass to which I am brought. Oh! what am I to tell my wife? how
shall I welcome her? with what face meet her? for she too has undone
me by coming uninvited in this my hour of sorrow; yet it was but natural
she should come with her daughter to prepare the bride and perform
the fondest duties, where she will discover my villainy. And for this
poor maid-why maid? Death, methinks, will soon make her his bride-how
I pity her! Thus will she plead to me, I trow: "My father will thou
slay me? Be such the wedding thou thyself mayst find, and whosoever
is a friend to thee!" while Orestes, from his station near us, will
cry in childish accents, inarticulate, yet fraught with meaning. Alas!
to what utter ruin Paris, the son of Priam, the cause of these troubles,
has brought me by his union with Helen! 

CHORUS I pity her myself, in such wise as a woman, and she a stranger,
may bemoan the misfortunes of royalty. 

MENELAUS  (Offering his hand) Thy hand, brother! let me grasp it.

AGAMEMNON I give it; thine is the victory, mine the sorrow.

MENELAUS By Pelops our reputed grandsire and Atreus our father I
swear to tell thee the truth from my heart, without any covert purpose,
but only what I think. The sight of thee in tears made me pity thee,
and in return I shed a tear for thee myself; I withdraw from my former
proposals, ceasing to be a cause of fear to thee; yea, and I will
put myself in thy present position; and I counsel thee, slay not thy
child nor prefer my interests to thine; for it is not just that thou
shouldst grieve, while I am glad, or that thy children should die,
while mine still see the light of day. What is it, after all, I seek?
If I am set on marriage, could I not find a bride as choice elsewhere?
Was I to lose a brother-the last I should have lost-to win a Helen,
getting bad for good? I was mad, impetuous as a youth, till I perceived,
on closer view, what slaying children really meant. Moreover I am
filled with compassion for the hapless maiden, doomed to bleed that
I may wed, when I reflect that we are kin. What has thy daughter to
do with Helen? Let the army be disbanded and leave Aulis; dry those
streaming eyes, brother, and provoke me not to tears. Whatever concern
thou hast in oracles that affect thy child, let it be none of mine;
into thy hands I resign my share therein. A sudden change, thou'lt
say, from my fell proposals! A natural course for me; affection for
my brother caused the change. These are the ways of a man not void
of virtue, to pursue on each occasion what is best. 

CHORUS A generous speech, worthy of Tantalus, the son of Zeus! Thou
dost not shame thy ancestry. 

AGAMEMNON I thank thee, Menelaus, for this unexpected suggestion;
'tis an honourable proposal, worthy of thee. 

MENELAUS Sometimes love, sometimes the selfishness of their families
causes a quarrel between brothers; I loathe a relationship of this
kind which is bitterness to both. 

AGAMEMNON 'Tis useless, for circumstances compel me to carry out
the murderous sacrifice of my daughter. 

MENELAUS How so? who will compel thee to slay thine own child?

AGAMEMNON The whole Achaean army here assembled. 

MENELAUS Not if thou send her back to Argos. 

AGAMEMNON I might do that unnoticed, but there will be another thing
I cannot. 

MENELAUS What is that? Thou must not fear the mob too much.

AGAMEMNON Calchas will tell the Argive host his oracles.

MENELAUS Not if he be killed ere that-an easy matter. 

AGAMEMNON The whole tribe of seers is a curse with its ambition.

MENELAUS Yes, and good for nothing and useless, when amongst us.

AGAMEMNON Has the thought, which is rising in my mind, no terrors
for thee? 

MENELAUS How can I understand thy meaning, unless thou declare it?

AGAMEMNON The son of Sisyphus knows all. 

MENELAUS Odysseus cannot possibly hurt us. 

AGAMEMNON He was ever shifty by nature, siding with the mob.

MENELAUS True, he is enslaved by the love of popularity, a fearful
evil. 

AGAMEMNON Bethink thee then, will he not arise among the Argives
and tell them the oracles that Calchas delivered, saying of me that
I undertook to offer Artemis a victim, and after all am proving false?
Then, when he has carried the army away with him, he will bid the
Argives slay us and sacrifice the maiden; and if I escape to Argos,
they will come and destroy the place, razing it to the ground, Cyclopean
walls and all. That is my trouble. Woe is me! to what straits Heaven
has brought me at this pass! Take one precaution for me, Menelaus,
as thou goest through the host, that Clytemnestra learn this not,
till I have taken my child and devoted her to death, that my affliction
may be attended with the fewest tears.  (Turning to the CHORUS)  And
you, ye stranger dames, keep silence.  (Exeunt AGAMEMNON and MENELAUS.)

CHORUS Happy they who find the goddess come in moderate might, sharing
with self-restraint in Aphrodite's gift of marriage and enjoying calm
and rest from frenzied passions, wilerein the Love-god, golden-haired,
stretches his charmed bow with arrows twain, and one is aimed at happiness,
the other at life's confusion. O lady Cypris, queen of beauty! far
from my bridal bower I ban the last. Be mine delight in moderation
and pure desires, and may I have a share in love, but shun excess
therein 

Men's natures vary, and their habits differ, but true virtue is always
manifest. Likewise the training that comes of education conduces greatly
to virtue; for not only is modesty wisdom, but it has also the rare
grace of seeing by its better judgment what is right; whereby glory,
ever young, is shed o'er life by reputation. A great thing it is to
follow virtue's footsteps-for women in their secret loves; while in
men again an inborn sense of order, shown in countless ways, adds
to a city's greatness. 

Thou camest, O Paris, to the place where thou wert reared to herd
the kine amid the white heifers of Ida, piping in foreign strain and
breathing on thy reeds an echo of the Phrygian airs Olympus played.
Full-uddered cows were browsing at the spot where that verdict 'twixt
goddesses was awaiting thee the cause of thy going to Hellas to stand
before the ivory palace, kindling love in Helen's tranced eyes and
feeling its flutter in thine own breast; whence the fiend of strife
brought Hellas with her chivalry and ships to the towers of Troy.

Oh! great is the bliss the great enjoy. Behold Iphigenia, the king's
royal child, and Clytaemnestra, the daughter of Tyndareus; how proud
their lineage! how high their pinnacle of fortune! These mighty ones,
whom wealth attends, are very gods in the eyes of less favoured folk.

Halt we here, maidens of Chalcis, and lift the queen from her chariot
to the ground without stumbling, supporting her gently in our arms,
with kind intent, that the renowned daughter of Agamemnon but just
arrived may feel no fear; strangers ourselves, avoid we aught that
may disturb or frighten the strangers from Argos.  (Enter CLYTAEMNESTRA
and IPHIGENIA.)  

CLYTAEMNESTRA I take this as a lucky omen, thy kindness and auspicious
greeting, and have good hope that it is to a happy marriage I conduct
the bride.  (To Attendants)  Take from the chariot the dowry I am
bringing for my daughter and convey it within with careful heed.

My daughter, leave the horse-drawn car, planting thy faltering footstep
delicately.  (To the CHORUS)  Maidens, take her in your arms and lift
her from the chariot, and let one of you give me the support of her
hand, that I may quit my seat in the carriage with fitting grace.

Some or you stand at the horses' heads; for the horse has a timid
eye, easily frightened; here take this child Orestes, son of Agamemnon,
babe as he still is. 

What! sleeping, little one, tired out by thy ride in the chariot?
Awake to bless thy sister's wedding; for thou, my gallant boy, shalt
get by this marriage a kinsman gallant as thyself, the Nereid's godlike
offspring. Come hither to thy mother, my daughter, Iphigenia, and
seat thyself beside me, and stationed near show my happiness to these
strangers; yes, come hither and welcome the sire thou lovest so dearly.

Hail! my honoured lord, king Agamemnon! we have obeyed thy commands
and are come.  (Enter AGAMEMNON.)  

IPHIGENIA  (Throwing herself into AGAMEMNON'S arms) Be not wroth
with me, mother, if I run from thy side and throw myself on my father's
breast. 

O my father! I long to outrun others and embrace thee after this long
while; for I yearn to see thy face; be not wroth with me.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Thou mayst do so, daughter; for of all the children
I have born, thou hast ever loved thy father best. 

IPHIGENIA I see thee, father, joyfully after a long season.

AGAMEMNON And I thy father thee; thy words do equal duty for both
of us. 

IPHIGENIA All hail, father! thou didst well in bringing me hither
to thee. 

AGAMEMNON I know not how I am to say yes or no to that, my child.

IPHIGENIA Ha! how wildly thou art looking, spite of thy joy at seeing
me. 

AGAMEMNON A man has many cares when he is king and general too.

IPHIGENIA Be mine, all mine to-day; turn not unto moody thoughts.

AGAMEMNON Why so I am, all thine to-day; I have no other thought.

IPHIGENIA Then smooth thy knitted brow, unbend and smile.

AGAMEMNON Lo! my child, my joy at seeing thee is even as it is.

IPHIGENIA And hast thou then the tear-drop streaming from thy eyes?

AGAMEMNON Ave, for long is the absence from each other, that awalts
us. 

IPHIGENIA I know not, dear father mine, I know not of what thou art
speaking. 

AGAMEMNON Thou art moving my pity all the more by speaking so sensibly.

IPHIGENIA My words shall turn to senselessness, if that will cheer
thee more. 

AGAMEMNON  (Aside) Ah, woe is me! this silence is too much.  (To
IPHIGENIA)  Thou hast my thanks. 

IPHIGENIA Stay with thy children at home, father. 

AGAMEMNON My own wish! but to my sorrow I may not humour it.

IPHIGENIA Ruin seize their warring and the woes of Menelaus!

AGAMEMNON First will that, which has been my life-long ruin, bring
ruin unto others. 

IPHIGENIA How long thou wert absent in the bays of Aulis!

AGAMEMNON Aye, and there is still a hindrance to my sending the army
forward. 

IPHIGENIA Where do men say the Phrygians live, father? 

AGAMEMNON In a land where I would Paris, the son of Priam, ne'er
had dwelt. 

IPHIGENIA 'Tis a long voyage thou art bound on, father, after thou
leavest me. 

AGAMEMNON Thou wilt meet thy father again, my daughter.

IPHIGENIA Ah! would it were seemly that thou shouldst take me as
a fellow-voyager! 

AGAMEMNON Thou too hast a voyage to make to a haven where thou wilt
remember thy father. 

IPHIGENIA Shall I sail thither with my mother or alone?

AGAMEMNON All alone, without father or mother. 

IPHIGENIA What! hast thou found me a new home, father! 

AGAMEMNON Enough of this! 'tis not for girls to know such things.

IPHIGENIA Speed home from Troy, I pray thee, father, as soon as thou
hast triumphed there. 

AGAMEMNON There is a sacrifice have first to offer here.

IPHIGENIA Yea, 'tis thy duty to heed religion with aid of holy rites.

AGAMEMNON Thou wilt witness it, for thou wilt be standing near the
laver. 

IPHIGENIA Am I to lead the dance then round the altar, father?

AGAMEMNON  (Aside) I count thee happier than myself because thou
knowest nothing.  (To IPHIGENIA)  Go within into the presence of maidens,
after thou hast given me thy hand and one sad kiss, on the eve of
thy lengthy sojourn far from thy father's side. 

Bosom, cheek, and golden hair! ah, how grievous ye have found Helen
and the Phrygians' city! I can no more; the tears come welling to
my eyes, the moment I touch thee.  (Exit IPHIGENIA., Turning to
CLYTAEMNESTRA)  Herein I crave thy pardon, daughter of Leda, if I
showed excessive grief at the thought of resigning my daughter to
Achilles; for though we are sending her to taste of bliss, still it
wrings a parent's heart, when he, the father who has toiled so hard
for them, commits his children to the homes of strangers.

CLYTAEMNESTRA I am not so void of sense; bethink thee, I shall go
through this as well, when I lead the maiden from the chamber to the
sound of the marriage-hymn; wherefore I chide thee not; but custom
will combine with time to make the smart grow less. 

As touching him, to whom thou hast betrothed our daughter, I know
his name, 'tis true, but would fain learn his lineage and the land
of his birth. 

AGAMEMNON There was one Aegina, the daughter of Asopus.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Who wedded her? some mortal or a god? 

AGAMEMNON Zeus, and she bare Aeacus, the prince of Cenone.

CLYTAEMNESTRA What son of Aeacus secured his father's halls?

AGAMEMNON Peleus, who wedded the daughter of Nereus. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA With the god's consent, or when he had taken her in
spite of gods? 

AGAMEMNON Zeus betrothed her, and her guardian gave consent.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Where did he marry her? amid the billows of the sea?

AGAMEMNON In Chiron's home, at sacred Pelion's foot. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA What! the abode ascribed to the race of Centaurs?

AGAMEMNON It was there the gods celebrated the marriage feast of
Peleus. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Did Thetis or his father train Achilles? 

AGAMEMNON Chiron brought him up, to prevent his learning the ways
of the wicked. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Ah wise the teacher, still wiser the father, who intrusted
his son to such hands. 

AGAMEMNON Such is the future husband of thy daughter. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA A blameless lord; but what city in Hellas is his?

AGAMEMNON He dwells on the banks of the river Apidanus, in the borders
of Phthia. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Wilt thou convey our daughter thither? 

AGAMEMNON He who takes her to himself will see to that.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Happiness attend the pair! Which day will he marry
her? 

AGAMEMNON As soon as the full moon comes to give its blessing.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Hast thou already offered the goddess a sacrifice to
usher in the maiden's marriage? 

AGAMEMNON I am about to do so; that is the very thing I was engaged
in. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Wilt thou celebrate the marriage-feast thereafter?

AGAMEMNON Yes, when I have offered a sacrifice required by Heaven
of me. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA But where am I to make ready the feast for the women?

AGAMEMNON Here beside our gallant Argive ships. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Finely here! but still I must; good come of it for
all that! 

AGAMEMNON I will tell thee, lady, what to do; so obey me now.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Wherein? for I was ever wont to yield thee obedience.

AGAMEMNON Here, where the bridegroom is, will! 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Which of my duties will ye perform in the mother's
absence? 

AGAMEMNON Give thy child away with help of Danai. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA And where am I to be the while? 

AGAMEMNON Get thee to Argos, and take care of thy unwedded daughters.

CLYTAEMNESTRA And leave my child? Then who will raise her bridal
torch? 

AGAMEMNON I will provide the proper wedding torch. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA That is not the custom; but thou thinkest lightly of
these things. 

AGAMEMNON It is not good thou shouldst be alone among a soldier-crowd.

CLYTAEMNESTRA It is good that a mother should give her own child
away. 

AGAMEMNON Aye, and that those maidens at home should not be left
alone. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA They are in safe keeping, pent in their maiden-bowers.

AGAMEMNON Obey. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Nay, by the goddess-queen of Argos! go, manage matters
out of doors; but in the house it is my place to decide what is proper
for maidens at their wedding. Exit. 

AGAMEMNON Woe is me! my efforts are baffled; I am disappointed in
my hope, anxious as I was to get my wife out of sight; foiled at every
point, I form my plots and subtle schemes against my best-beloved.
But I will go, in spite of all, with Calchas the priest, to inquire
the goddess's good pleasure, fraught with ill-luck as it is to me,
and with trouble to Hellas. He who is wise should keep in his house
a good and useful wife or none at all.  (Exit.)  

CHORUS They say the Hellenes' gathered host will come in arms aboard
their ships to Simois with its silver eddies, even to Ilium, the plain
of Troy beloved by Phoebus; where famed Cassandra, I am told, whene'er
the god's resistless prophecies inspire her, wildly tosses her golden
tresses, wreathed with crown of verdant bay. And on the towers of
Troy and round her walls shall Trojans stand, when sea-borne troops
with brazen shields row in on shapely ships to the channels of the
Simois, eager to take Helen, the sister of that heavenly pair whom
Zeus begat, from Priam, and bear her back to Hellas by toil of Achaea's
shields and spears; encircling Pergamus, the Phrygians' town, with
murderous war around her stone-built towers, dragging men's heads
backward to cut their throats, and sacking the citadel of Troy from
roof to base, a cause of many tears to maids and Priam's wife; and
Helen, the daughter of Zeus, shall weep in bitter grief, because she
left her lord. 

Oh! ne'er may there appear to me or to my children's children the
prospect which the wealthy Lydian dames and Phrygia's brides will
have, as at their looms they hold converse: "Say who will pluck this
fair blossom from her ruined country, tightening his grasp on lovely
tresses till the tears flow? 'Tis all through thee, the offspring
of the long-necked swan; if indeed it be a true report that Leda bare
thee to a winged bird, when Zeus transformed himself thereto, or whether,
in the pages of the poets, fables have carried these tales to men's
ears idly, out of season."  (Enter ACHILLES.)  

ACHILLES Where in these tents is Achaea's general? Which of his servants
will announce to him that Achilles, the son of Peleus, is at his gates
seeking him? For this delay at the Euripus is not the same for all
of us; there be some, for instance, who, though still unwed, have
left their houses desolate and are idling here upon the beach, while
others are married and have children; so strange the longing for this
expedition that has fallen on their hearts by Heaven's will. My own
just plea must I declare, and whoso else hath any wish will speak
for himself. Though I have left Pharsalia and Peleus, still I linger
here by reason of these light breezes at the Euripus, restraining
my Myrmidons, while they are ever instant with me saying, "Why do
we tarry, Achilles? how much longer must we count the days to the
start for Ilium? do something, if thou art so minded; else lead home
thy men, and wait not for the tardy action of these Atridae."  (Enter
CLYTAEMNESTRA.)  

CLYTAEMNESTRA Hail to thee, son of the Nereid goddess! I heard thy
voice from within the tent and therefore came forth. 

ACHILLES O modesty revered! who can this lady be whom I behold, so
richly dowered with beauty's gifts? 

CLYTAEMNESTRA No wonder thou knowest me not, seeing I am one thou
hast never before set eyes on; I praise thy reverent address to modesty.

ACHILLES Who art thou, and wherefore art thou come to the mustering
of the Danai-thou, a woman, to a fenced camp of men? 

CLYTAEMNESTRA The daughter of Leda I; my name Clytaemnestra; and
my husband king Agamemnon. 

ACHILLES Well and shortly answered on all important points! but it
ill befits that I should stand talking to women. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Stay; why seek to fly? Give me thy hand, a prelude
to a happy marriage. 

ACHILLES What is it thou sayest? I give thee my hand? Were I to lay
a finger where I have no right, I could ne'er meet Agamemnon's eye.

CLYTAEMNESTRA The best of rights hast thou, seeing it is my child
thou wilt wed, O son of the sea-goddess, whom Nereus begat.

ACHILLES What wedding dost thou speak of? words fail me, lady; can
thy wits have gone astray and art thou inventing this? 

CLYTAEMNESTRA All men are naturally shy in the presence of new relations,
when these remind them of their wedding. 

ACHILLES Lady, I have never wooed daughter of thine, nor have the
sons of Atreus ever mentioned marriage to me. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA What can it mean? thy turn now to marvel at my words,
for thine are passing strange to me. 

ACHILLES Hazard a guess; that we can both do in this matter; for
it may be we are both correct in our statements. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA What! have I suffered such indignity? The marriage
I am courting has no reality, it seems; I am ashamed of it.

ACHILLES Some one perhaps has made a mock of thee and me; pay no
heed thereto; make light of it. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Farewell; I can no longer face thee with unfaltering
eyes, after being made a liar and suffering this indignity.

ACHILLES 'Tis "farewell" too I bid thee, lady; and now I go within
the tent to seek thy husband. 

ATTENDANT  (Calling through the tent-door) Stranger of the race of
Aeacus, stay awhile! Ho there! thee I mean, O goddess-born, and thee,
daughter of Leda. 

ACHILLES Who is it calling through the half-opened door? what fear
his voice betrays! 

ATTENDANT A slave am I; of that I am not proud, for fortune permits
it not. 

ACHILLES Whose slave art thou? not mine; for mine and Agamemnon's
goods are separate. 

ATTENDANT I belong to this lady who stands before the tent, a gift
to her from Tyndareus her father. 

ACHILLES I am waiting; tell me, if thou art desirous, why thou hast
stayed me. 

ATTENDANT Are ye really all alone here at the door? 

CLYTAEMNESTRA To us alone wilt thou address thyself; come forth from
the king's tent. 

ATTENDANT  (Coming out) O Fortune and my own foresight, preserve
whom I desire! 

ACHILLES That speech will save them-in the future; it has a certain
pompous air. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Delay not for the sake of touching my right hand, if
there is aught that thou wouldst say to me. 

ATTENDANT Well, thou knowest my character and my devotion to thee
and thy children. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA I know thou hast grown old in the service of my house.

ATTENDANT Likewise thou knowest it was in thy dowry king Agamemnon
received me. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Yes, thou camest to Argos with me, and hast been mine
this long time past. 

ATTENDANT True; and though I bear thee all goodwill, I like not thy
lord so well. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Come, come, unfold whate'er thou hast to say.

ATTENDANT Her father, he that begat her, is on the point of slaying
thy daughter with his own hand. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA How? Out upon thy story, old dotard! thou art mad.

ATTENDANT Severing with a sword the hapless maid's white throat.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Ah, woe is me! Is my husband haply mad? 

ATTENDANT Nay; sane, except where thou and thy daughter are concerned;
there he is mad. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA What is his reason? what vengeful fiend impels him?

ATTENDANT Oracles-at least so Calchas says, in order that the host
may start 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Whither? Woe is me, and woe is thee, thy father's destined
victim! 

ATTENDANT To the halls of Dardanus, that Menelaus may recover Helen.

CLYTAEMNESTRA So Helen's return then was fated to affect Iphigenia?

ATTENDANT Thou knowest all; her father is about to offer thy child
to Artemis. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA But that marriage-what pretext had it for bringing
me from home? 

ATTENDANT An inducement to thee to bring thy daughter cheerfully,
to wed her to Achilles. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA On a deadly errand art thou come, my daughter, both
thou, and I, thy mother. 

ATTENDANT Piteous the lot of both of you-and fearful Agamemnon's
venture. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Alas! I am undone; my eyes can no longer stem their
tears. 

ATTENDANT What more natural than to weep the loss of thy children?

CLYTAEMNESTRA Whence, old man, dost say thou hadst this news?

ATTENDANT I had started to carry thee a letter referring to the former
writing. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Forbidding or combining to urge my bringing the child
to her death? 

ATTENDANT Nay, forbidding it, for thy lord was then in his sober
senses. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA How comes it then, if thou wert really bringing me
a letter, that thou dost not now deliver into my hands? 

ATTENDANT Menelaus snatched it from me-he who caused this trouble.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Dost thou hear that, son of Peleus, the Nereid's child?

ACHILLES I have been listening to the tale of thy sufferings, and
I am indignant to think I was used as a tool. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA They will slay my child; they have tricked her with
thy marriage. 

ACHILLES Like thee I blame thy lord, nor do I view it with mere indifference.

CLYTAEMNESTRA No longer will I let shame prevent my kneeling to thee,
a mortal to one goddess-born; why do I affect reserve? whose interests
should I consult before my child's?  (Throwing herself before ACHILLES)
Oh! help me, goddess-born, in my sore distress, and her that was
called thy bride-in vain, 'tis true, yet called she was. For thee
it was I wreathed her head and led her forth as if to marriage, but
now it is to slaughter I am bringing her. On thee will come reproach
because thou didst not help her; for though not wedded to her, yet
wert thou the loving husband of my hapless maid in name at any rate.
By thy beard, right hand, and mother too I do implore thee; for thy
name it was that worked my ruin, and thou art bound to stand by that.
Except thy knees I have no altar whereunto to fly; and not a friend
stands at my side. Thou hast heard the cruel abandoned scheme of Agamemnon;
and I, a woman, am come, as thou seest, to a camp of lawless sailor-folk,
bold in evil's cause, though useful when they list; wherefore if thou
boldly stretch forth thine arm in my behalf, our safety is assured;
but if thou withhold it, we are lost. 

CHORUS A wondrous thing is motherhood, carrying with it a potent
spell, wherein all share, so that for their children's sake they will
endure affliction. 

ACHILLES My proud spirit is stirred to range aloft, but it has learnt
to grieve in misfortune and rejoice in high prosperity with equal
moderation. For these are the men who can count on ordering all their
life aright by wisdom's rules. True, there are cases where 'tis pleasant
not to be too wise, but there are others, where some store of wisdom
helps. Brought up in godly Chiron's halls myself, I learnt to keep
a single heart; and provided the Atridae lead aright, I will obey
them; but when they cease therefrom, no more will I obey. Nay, but
here and in Troy I will show the freedom of my nature, and, as far
as in me lies, do honour to Ares with my spear. Thee, lady, who hast
suffered so cruelly from thy nearest and dearest, will I, by every
effort in a young man's power, set right, investing thee with that
amount of pity, and never shall thy daughter, after being once called
my bride, die by her father's hand; for I will not lend myself to
thy husband's subtle tricks; no! for it will be my name that kills
thy child, although it wieldeth not the steel. Thy own husband is
the actual cause, but I shall no longer be guiltless, if, because
of me and my marriage, this maiden perishes, she that hath suffered
past endurance and been the victim of affronts most strangely undeserved.
So am I made the poorest wretch in Argos; I a thing of naught, and
Menelaus counting for a man! No son of Peleus I, but the issue of
a vengeful fiend, if my name shall serve thy husband for the murder.
Nay! by Nereus, who begat my mother Thetis, in his home amid the flowing
waves, never shall king Agamemnon touch thy daughter, no! not even
to the laying of a finger-tip upon her robe; else will Sipylus, that
frontier town of barbarism, the cradle of those chieftains' line,
be henceforth a city indeed, while Phthia's name will nowhere find
mention. Calchas, the seer, shall rue beginning the sacrifice with
his barley-meal and lustral water. Why, what is a seer? A man who
with luck tells the truth sometimes, with frequent falsehoods, but
when his luck deserts him, collapses then and there. It is not to
secure a bride that I have spoken thus-there be maids unnumbered eager
to have my love-no! but king Agamemnon has put an insult on me; he
should have asked my leave to use my name as a means to catch the
child, for it was I chiefly who induced Clytaemnestra to betroth her
daughter to me; verily I had yielded this to Hellas, if that was where
our going to Ilium broke down; I would never have refused to further
my fellow soldiers' common interest. But, as it is, I am as naught
in the eyes of those chieftains, and little they reck of treating
me well or ill. My sword shall soon know if any one is to snatch thy
daughter from me, for then will I make it reek with the bloody stains
of slaughter, ere it reach Phrygia. Calm thyself then; as a god in
his might I appeared to thee, without being so, but such will I show
myself for all that. 

CHORUS Son of Peleus, thy words are alike worthy of thee and that
sea-born deity, the holy goddess. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Ah! would I could find words to utter thy praise without
excess, and yet not lose the graciousness thereof by stinting it;
for when the good are praised, they have a feeling, as it were, of
hatred for those who in their praise exceed the mean. But I am ashamed
of intruding a tale of woe, since my affliction touches myself alone
and thou art not affected by troubles of mine; but still it looks
well for the man of worth to assist the unfortunate, even when he
is not connected with them. Wherefore pity us, for our sufferings
cry for pity; in the first place, I have harboured an idle hope in
thinking to have thee wed my daughter; and next, perhaps, the slaying
of my child will be to thee an evil omen in thy wooing hereafter,
against which thou must guard thyself. Thy words were good, both first
and last; for if thou will it so, my daughter will be saved. Wilt
have her clasp thy knees in suppliant wise? 'Tis no maid's part; yet
if it seem good to thee, why come she shall with the modest look of
free-born maid; but if I shall obtain the self-same end from thee
without ker coming, then let her abide within, for there is dignity
in her reserve; still reserve must only go as far as the case allows.

ACHILLES Bring not thou thy daughter out for me to see, lady, nor
let us incur the reproach of the ignorant; for an army, when gathered
together without domestic duties to employ it, loves the evil gossip
of malicious tongues. After all, should ye supplicate me, ye will
attain a like result as if I had ne'er been supplicated; for I am
myself engaged in a mighty struggle to rid you of your troubles. One
thing be sure thou hast heard; I will not tell a lie; if I do that
or idly mock thee, may I die, but live if I preserve the maid.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Bless thee for ever succouring the distressed!

ACHILLES Hearken then to me, that the matter may succeed.

CLYTAEMNESTRA What is thy proposal? for hear thee I must.

ACHILLES Let us once more urge her father to a better frame of mind.

CLYTAEMNESTRA He is something of a coward, and fears the army too
much. 

ACHILLES Still argument o'erthroweth argument. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Cold hope indeed; but tell me what I must do.

ACHILLES Entreat him first not to slay his children, and if he is
stubborn, come to me. Fir if he consents to thy request, my intervention
need go no further, since this consent insures thy safety. I too shall
show myself in a better light to my friend, and the army will not
blame me, if I arrange the matter by reason rather than force; while,
should things turn out well, the result will prove satisfactory both
to thee and thy friends, even without my interference. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA How sensibly thou speakest! I must act as seemeth best
to thee; but should I fail of my object, where am I to see thee again?
whither must I turn my wretched steps and find thee ready to champion
my distress? 

ACHILLES I am keeping watch to guard thee, where occasion calls,
that none see thee passing through the host of Danai with that scared
look. Shame not thy father's house; for Tyndareus deserveth not to
be ill spoken of, being a mighty man in Hellas. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA 'Tis even so. Command me; I must play the slave to
thee. If there are gods, thou for thy righteous dealing wilt find
them favourable; if there are none, what need to toil?  (Exeunt ACHILLES
and CLYTAEMNESTRA.)  

CHORUS What wedding-hymn was that which raised its strains to the
sound of Libyan flutes, to the music of the dancer's lyre, and the
note of the pipe of reeds? 

'Twas in the day Pieria's fair-tressed choir came o'er the slopes
of Pelion to the marriage-feast of Peleus, beating the ground with
print of golden sandals at the banquet of the gods, and hymning in
dulcet strains the praise of Thetis and the son of Aeacus, o'er the
Centaurs' hill, down through the woods of Pelion. 

There was the Dardanian boy, Phrygian Ganymede, whom Zeus delights
to honour, drawing off the wine he mixed in the depths of golden bowls;
while, along the gleaming sand, the fifty daughters of Nereus graced
the marriage with their dancing, circling in a mazy ring.

Came too the revel-rout of Centaurs, mounted on horses, to the feast
of the gods and the mixing-bowl of Bacchus, leaning on fir-trees,
with wreaths of green foliage round their heads; and loudly cried
the prophet Chiron, skilled in arts inspired by Phoebus; "Daughter
of Nereus, thou shalt bear a son"-whose name he gave-"a dazzling light
to Thessaly; for he shall come with an army of spearmen to the far-famed
land of Priam, to set it in a blaze, his body cased in a suit of golden
mail forged by Hephaestus, a gift from his goddess-mother, even from
Thetis who bore him." 

Then shed the gods a blessing on the marriage of the high-born bride,
who was first of Nereus' daughters, and on the wedding of Peleus.
But thee, will Argives crown, wreathing the lovely tresses of thy
hair, like a dappled mountain hind brought from some rocky cave or
a heifer undefiled, and staining with blood thy human throat; though
thou wert never reared like these amid the piping and whistling of
herdsmen, but at thy mother's side, to be decked one day by her as
the bride of a son of Inachus. Where now does the face of modesty
or virtue avail aught? seeing that godlessness holds sway, and virtue
is neglected by men and thrust behind them, lawlessness o'er law prevailing,
and mortals no longer making common cause to keep the jealousy of
gods from reaching them. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA  (Reappearing from the tent) I have come from the tent
to look out for my husband, who went away and left its shelter long
ago; while that poor child, my daughter, hearing of the death her
father designs for her, is in tears, uttering in many keys her piteous
lamentation.  (Catching sight of AGAMEMNON)  It Seems I was speaking
of one not far away; for there is Agamemnon, who will soon be detected
in the commission of a crime against his own child.  (Enter AGAMEMNON.)

AGAMEMNON Daughter of Leda, 'tis lucky I have found thee outside
the tent, to discuss with thee in our daughter's absence subjects
not suited for the ears of maidens on the eve of marriage.

CLYTAEMNESTRA What, pray, is dependent on the present crisis?

AGAMEMNON Send the maiden out to join her father, for the lustral
water stands there ready, and barley-meal to scatter with the hand
on the cleansing flame, and heifers to be slain in honour of the goddess
Artemis, to usher in the marriage, their black blood spouting from
them. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Though fair the words thou usest, I know not how I
am to name thy deeds in terms of praise. 

Come forth, my daughter; full well thou knowest what is in thy father's
mind; take the child Orestes, thy brother, and bring him with thee
in the folds of thy robe.  (Enter IPHIGENIA.)  Behold chold she comes,
in obedience to thy summons. Myself will speak the rest alike for
her and me. 

AGAMEMNON My child, why weepest thou and no longer lookest cheerfully?
why art thou fixing thine eyes upon the ground and holding thy robe
before them? 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Alas! with which of my woes shall I begin? for I may
treat them all as first, or put them last or midway anywhere.

AGAMEMNON How now? I find you all alike, confusion and alarm in every
eye. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA My husband, answer frankly the questions I ask thee.

AGAMEMNON There is no necessity to order me; I am willing to be questioned.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Dost thou mean to slay thy child and mine?

AGAMEMNON  (Starting) Ha! these are heartless words, unwarranted
suspicions! 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Peace! answer me that question first. 

AGAMEMNON Put a fair question and thou shalt have a fair answer.

CLYTAEMNESTRA I have no other questions to put; give me no other
answers. 

AGAMEMNON O fate revered, O destiny, and fortune mine! 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Aye, and mine and this maid's too; the three share
one bad fortune. 

AGAMEMNON Whom have I injured? 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Dost thou ask me this question? A thought like that
itself amounts to thoughtlessness. 

AGAMEMNON Ruined! my secret out! 

CLYTAEMNESTRA I know all; I have heard what thou art bent on doing
to me. Thy very silence and those frequent groans are a confession;
tire not thyself by telling it. 

AGAMEMNON Lo! I am silent; for, if I tell thee a falsehood, needs
must I add effrontery to misfortune. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Well, listen; for I will now unfold my meaning and
no longer employ dark riddles. In the first place-to reproach thee
first with this-it was not of my own free will but by force that thou
didst take and wed me, after slaying Tantalus, my former husband,
and dashing my babe on the ground alive, when thou hadst torn him
from my breast with brutal violence. Then, when those two sons of
Zeus, who were likewise my brothers, came flashing on horseback to
war with thee, Tyndareus, my aged sire, rescued thee because of thy
suppliant prayers, and thou in turn hadst me to wife. Once reconciled
to thee upon this footing, thou wilt bear me witness I have been a
blameless wife to thee and thy family, chaste in love, an honour to
thy house, that so thy coming in might be with joy and thy going out
with gladness. And 'tis seldom a man secures a wife like this, though
the getting of a worthless woman is no rarity. 

Besides three daughters, of one of whom thou art heartlessly depriving
me, I am the mother of this son of thine. If anyone asks thee thy
reason for slaying her, tell me, what wilt thou say? or must say it
for thee? "It is that Menelaus may recover Helen." An honourable exchange,
indeed, to pay a wicked woman's price in children's lives! 'Tis buying
what we most detest with what we hold most dear. Again, if thou go
forth with the host, leaving me in thy halls, and art long absent
at Troy, what will my feelings be at home, dost think? when I behold
each vacant chair and her chamber now deserted, and then sit down
alone in tears, making ceaseless lamentation for her, "Ah! my child,
he that begat thee hath slain thee himself, he and no one else, nor
was it by another's hand...to thy home, after leaving such a price
to be paid; for it needs now but a trifling pretext for me and the
daughters remaining to give thee the reception it is right thou shouldst
receive. I adjure thee by the gods, compel me not to sin against thee,
nor sin thyself. Go to; suppose thou sacrifice the child; what prayer
wilt thou utter, when 'tis done? what will the blessing be that thou
wilt invoke upon thyself as thou art slaying our daughter? an ill
returning maybe, seeing the disgrace that speeds thy going forth.
Is it right that I should pray for any luck to attend thee? Surely
we should deem the gods devoid of sense, if we harboured a kindly
feeling towards murderers. Shalt thou embrace thy children on thy
coming back to Argos? Nay, thou hast no right. Will any child of thing
e'er face thee, if thou have surrendered one of them to death? Has
this ever entered into thy calculations, or does thy one duty consist
in carrying a sceptre about and marching at the head of an army? when
thou mightest have made this fair proposal among the Argives; "Is
it your wish, Achaeans, to sail for Phrygia's shores? Why then, cast
lots whose daughter has to die." For that would have been a fair course
for thee to pursue, instead of picking out thy own child for the victim
and presenting her to the Danai; or Menelaus, inasmuch as it was his
concern, should have slain Hermione for her mother. As it is, I, who
still am true to thee, must lose my child; while she, who went astray,
will return with her daughter, and live in happiness at Sparta. If
I am wrong in aught herein, answer me; but if my words have been fairly
urged, do not still slay thy child, who is mine too, and thou wilt
be wise. 

CHORUS Hearken to her Agamemnon, for to join in saving thy children's
lives is surely a noble deed; none would gainsay this. 

IPHIGENIA Had I the eloquence of Orpheus, my father, to move the
rocks by chanted spells to follow me, or to charm by speaking whom
I would, I had resorted to it. But as it is, I'll bring my tears-the
only art I know; for that I might attempt. And about thy knees, in
suppliant wise, I twine my limbs these limbs thy wife here bore. Destroy
me not before my time, for sweet is to look upon the light, and force
me not to visit scenes below. I was the first to call thee father,
thou the first to call me child; the first was I to sit upon thy knee
and give and take the fond caress. And this was what thou then wouldst
say, "Shall I see thee, my child, living a happy prosperous life in
a husband's home one day, in a manner worthy of myself?" And I in
my turn would ask, as I hung about thy beard, whereto I now am clinging,
"How shall I see thee? Shall I be giving thee a glad reception in
my halls, father, in thy old age, repaying all thy anxious care in
rearing me? 

I remember all we said, 'tis thou who hast forgotten and now wouldst
take my life. By Pelops, I entreat thee spare me, by thy father Atreus
and my mother here, who suffers now a second time the pangs she felt
before when bearing me! What have I to do with the marriage of Paris
and Helen? why is his coming to prove my ruin, father? Look upon me;
one glance, one kiss bestow, that this at least I may carry to my
death as a memorial of thee, though thou heed not my pleading.  (Holding
up the babe to ORESTES)  Feeble ally though thou art, brother, to
thy loved ones, yet add thy tears to mine and entreat our father for
thy sister's life; even in babes there is a natural sense of ill.
O father, see this speechless supplication made to thee; pity me;
have mercy on my tender years! Yea, by thy beard we two fond hearts
implore thy pity, the one a babe, a full-grown maid the other. By
summing all my pleas in one, I will prevail in what I say. To gaze
upon yon light is man's most cherished gift; that life below is nothingness,
and whoso longs for death is mad. Better live a life of woe than die
a death of glory! 

CHORUS Ah, wretched Helen! Awful the struggle that has come to the
sons of Atreus and their children, thanks to thee and those marriages
of thine. 

AGAMEMNON While loving my own children, I yet understand what should
move my pity and what should not; I were a madman else. 'Tis terrible
for me to bring myself to this, nor less terrible is it to refuse,
daughter; for I must fare the same. Ye see the vastness of von naval
host, and the numbers of bronze clad warriors from Hellas, who can
neither make their way to Ilium's towers nor raze the far-famed citadel
of Troy, unless I offer thee according to the word of Calchas the
seer. Some mad desire possesses the host of Hellas to sail forthwith
to the land of the barbarians, and put a stop to the rape of wives
from Hellas, and they will slay my daughters in Argos as well as you
and me, if I disregard the goddess's behests. It is not Menelaus who
hath enslaved me to him, child, nor have I followed wish of his; nay,
'tis Hellas, for whom I must sacrifice thee whether I will or no;
to this necessity I bow my head; for her freedom must be preserved,
as far as any help of thine, daughter, or mine can go; nor must they,
who are the sons Hellas, be pillaged of their wives by barbarian robbery.

AGAMEMNON rushes from the stage, 

CLYTAEMNESTRA My child Ye stranger ladies! 
Woe is me for this thy death! Thy father flies, surrendering thee
to Hades. 

IPHIGENIA Woe is me, O mother mine! for the same strain hath fallen
to both of us in our fortune. No more for me the light of day! no
more the beams of yonder sun! Woe for that snow-beat glen in Phrygia
and the hills of Ida, where Priam once exposed a tender babe, torn
from his mother's arms to meet a deadly doom, e'en Paris, called the
child of Ida in the Phrygians' town. Would Priam ne'er had settled
him, the herdsman reared amid the herds, beside that water crystal-clear,
where are fountains of the Nymphs and their meadow rich with blooming
flowers, where hyacinths and rose-buds blow for goddesses to gather!
Hither one day came Pallas and Cypris of the subtle heart, Hera too
and Hermes messenger of Zeus-Cypris, proud of the longing she causes;
Pallas of her prowess; and Hera of her royal marriage with king Zeus-to
decide a hateful strife about their beauty; but it is my death, maidens-fraught,
'tis true, with glory to the Danai-that Artemis has received as an
offering, before they begin the voyage to Ilium. 

O mother, mother! he that begat me to this life of sorrow has gone
and left me all alone. Ah! woe is me! a bitter, bitter sight for me
was Helen, evil Helen! to me now doomed to bleed and die, slaughtered
by an impious sire. 

I would this Aulis had never received in its havens here the sterns
of their bronze-beaked ships, the fleet which was speeding them to
Troy; and would that Zeus had never breathed on the Euripus a wind
to stop the expedition, tempering, as he doth, a different breeze
to different men, so that some have joy in setting sail, and sorrow
some, and others hard constraint, to make some start and others stay
and others furl their sails! Full of trouble then, it seems, is the
race of mortals, full of trouble verily; and 'tis ever Fate's decree
that man should find distress. 

Woe! woe to thee, thou child of Tyndareus, for the suffering and anguish
sore, which thou art causing the Danai! 

CHORUS I pity thee for thy cruel fate-a fate I would thou ne'er hadst
met! 

IPHIGENIA O mother that bare me! I see a throng of men approaching.

CLYTAEMNESTRA It is the goddess-born thou seest, child, for whom
thou camest hither. 

IPHIGENIA  (Calling into the tent) Open the tent-door to me, servants,
that I may hide myself. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Why seek to fly, my child? 

IPHIGENIA I am ashamed to face Achilles. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Wherefore? 

IPHIGENIA The luckless ending to our marriage causes me to feel abashed.

CLYTAEMNESTRA No time for affectation now in face of what has chanced.
Stay then; reserve will do no good, if only we can-  (Enter ACHILLES.)

ACHILLES Daughter of Leda, lady of sorrows! 

CLYTAEMNESTRA No misnomer that. 

ACHILLES A fearful cry is heard among the Argives. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA What is it? tell me. 

ACHILLES It concerns thy child. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA An evil omen for thy words. 

ACHILLES They say her sacrifice is necessary. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA And is there no one to say a word against them?

ACHILLES Indeed I was in some danger myself from the tumult.

CLYTAEMNESTRA In danger of what? kind sir. 

ACHILLES Of being stoned. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Surely not for trying to save my daughter?

ACHILLES The very reason. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Who would have dared to lay a finger on thee?

ACHILLES The men of Hellas, one and all. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Were not thy Myrmidon warriors at thy side?

ACHILLES They were the first who turned against me. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA My child! we are lost, undone, it seems. 

ACHILLES They taunted me as the man whom marriage had enslaved.

CLYTAEMNESTRA And what didst thou answer them? 

ACHILLES I craved the life of her I meant to wed- 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Justly so. 

ACHILLES The wife her father promised me. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Aye, and sent to fetch from Argos. 

ACHILLES But I was overcome by clamorous cries. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Truly the mob is a dire mischief. 

ACHILLES But I will help thee for all that. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Wilt thou really fight them single-handed?

ACHILLES Dost see these warriors here, carrying my arms?

CLYTAEMNESTRA Bless thee for thy kind intent! 

ACHILLES Well, I shall be blessed. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Then my child will not be slaughtered now?

ACHILLES No, not with my consent at any rate. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA But will any of them come to lay hands on the maid?

ACHILLES Thousands of them, with Odysseus at their head.

CLYTAEMNESTRA The son of Sisyphus? 

ACHILLES The very same. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Acting for himself or by the army's order?

ACHILLES By their choice-and his own. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA An evil choice indeed, to stain his hands in blood!

ACHILLES But I will hold him back. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Will he seize and bear her hence against her will?

ACHILLES Aye, by her golden hair no doubt. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA What must I do, when it comes to that? 

ACHILLES Keep hold of thy daughter. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Be sure that she shall not be slain, as far as that
can help her. 

ACHILLES Believe me, it will come to this. 

IPHIGENIA Mother, hear me while I speak, for I see that thou art
wroth with thy husband to no purpose; 'tis hard for us to persist
in impossibilities. Our thanks are due to this stranger for his ready
help; but thou must also see to it that he is not reproached by the
army, leaving us no better off and himself involved in trouble. Listen,
mother; hear what thoughts have passed across my mind. I am resolved
to die; and this I fain would do with honour, dismissing from me what
is mean. Towards this now, mother, turn thy thoughts, and with me
weigh how well I speak; to me the whole of mighty Hellas looks; on
me the passage o'er the sea depends; on me the sack of Troy; and in
my power it lies to check henceforth barbarian raids on happy Hellas,
if ever in the days to come they seek to seize her daughters, when
once they have atoned by death for the violation of Helen's marriage
by Paris. All this deliverance will my death insure, and my fame for
setting Hellas free will be a happy one. Besides, I have no right
at all to cling too fondly to my life; for thou didst not bear me
for myself alone, but as a public blessing to all Hellas. What! shall
countless warriors, armed with shields, those myriads sitting at the
oar, find courage to attack the foe and die for Hellas, because their
fatherland is wronged, and my one life prevent all this? What kind
of justice is that? could I find a word in answer? Now turn we to
that other point. It is not right that this man should enter the lists
with all Argos or be slain fox a woman's sake. Better a single man
should see the light than ten thousand women. If Artemis is minded
to take this body, am I, a weak mortal, to thwart the goddess? Nay,
that were impossible. To Hellas I resign it; offer this sacrifice
and make an utter end of Troy. This is my enduring monument; marriage,
motherhood, and fame-all these is it to me. And it is but right, mother,
that Hellenes should rule barbarians, but not barbarians Hellenes,
those being slaves, while these are free. 

CHORUS Thou playest a noble part, maiden; but sickly are the whims
of Fate and the goddess. 

ACHILLES Daughter of Agamemnon I some god was bent on blessing me,
could I but have won thee for my wife. In thee I reckon Hellas happy,
and thee in Hellas; for this that thou hast said is good and worthy
of thy fatherland; since thou, abandoning a strife with heavenly powers,
which are too strong for thee, has fairly weighed advantages and needs.
But now that I have looked into thy noble nature, I feel still more
a fond desire to win thee for my bride. Look to it; for I would fain
serve thee and receive thee in my halls; and witness Thetis, how I
grieve to think I shall not save thy life by doing battle with the
Danai. Reflect, I say; a dreadful ill is death. 

IPHIGENIA This I say, without regard to anyone. Enough that the daughter
of Tyndareus is causing wars and bloodshed by her beauty; then be
not slain thyself, sir stranger, nor seek to slay another on my account;
but let me, if I can, save Hellas. 

ACHILLES Heroic spirit! I can say no more to this, since thou art
so minded; for thine is a noble resolve; why should not one avow the
truth? Yet will I speak, for thou wilt haply change thy mind; that
thou mayst know then what my offer is, I will go and place these arms
of mine near the altar, resolved not to permit thy death but to prevent
it; for brave as thou art, at sight of the knife held at thy throat,
thou wilt soon avail thyself of what I said. So I will not let thee
perish through any thoughtlessness of thine, but will go to the temple
of the goddess with these arms and await thy arrival there.  (Exit
ACHILLES.)  

IPHIGENIA Mother, why so silent, thine eyes wet with tears?

CLYTAEMNESTRA I have reason, woe is me! to be sad at heart.

IPHIGENIA Forbear; make me not a coward; here in one thing obey me.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Say what it is, my child, for at my hands thou shalt
ne'er suffer injury. 

IPHIGENIA Cut not off the tresses of thy hair for me, nor clothe
thyself in sable garb. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Why, my child, What is it thou hast said? Shall I,
when I lose thee- 

IPHIGENIA "Lose" me, thou dost not; I am saved and thou renowned,
as far as I can make thee. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA How so? Must I not mourn thy death? 

IPHIGENIA By no means, for I shall have no tomb heaped o'er me.

CLYTAEMNESTRA What, is not the act of dying held to imply burial?

IPHIGENIA The altar of the goddess, Zeus's daughter, will be my tomb.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Well, my child, I will let thee persuade me, for thou
sayest well. 

IPHIGENIA Aye, as one who prospereth and doeth Hellas service.

CLYTAEMNESTRA What message shall I carry to thy sisters?

IPHIGENIA Put not mourning raiment on them either. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA But is there no fond message I can give the maidens
from thee? 

IPHIGENIA Yes, my farewell words; and promise me to rear this babe
Orestes to manhood. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Press him to thy bosom; 'tis thy last look.

IPHIGENIA O thou that art most dear to me! thou hast helped thy friends
as thou hadst means. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Is there anything I can do to pleasure thee in Argos?

IPHIGENIA Yes, hate not my father, thy own husband. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Fearful are the trials through which he has to go because
of thee. 

IPHIGENIA It was against his will he ruined me for the sake of Hellas.

CLYTAEMNESTRA Ah! but be employed base treachery, unworthy of Atreus.

IPHIGENIA Who will escort me hence, before my hair is torn?

CLYTAEMNESTRA I will go with thee. 

IPHIGENIA No, not thou; thou say'st not well. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA I will, clinging to thy robes. 

IPHIGENIA Be persuaded by me, mother, stay here; for this is the
better way alike for me and thee; but let one of these attendants
of my father conduct me to the meadow of Artemis, where I shall be
sacrificed. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Art gone from me, my child? 

IPHIGENIA Aye, and with no chance of ever returning. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Leaving thy mother? 

IPHIGENIA Yes, as thou seest, undeservedly. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Hold! leave me not! 

IPHIGENIA I cannot let thee shed a tear.  (Exit CLYTAEMNESTRA. To
the CHORUS)  Be it yours, maidens, to hymn in joyous strains Artemis,
the child of Zeus, for my hard lot; and let the order for a solemn
hush go forth to the Danai. Begin the sacrifice with the baskets,
let the fire blaze for the purifying meal of sprinkling, and my father
pace from left to right about the altar; for I come to bestow on Hellas
safety crowned with victory. Lead me hence, me the destroyer of Ilium's
town and the Phrygians; give me wreaths to cast about me; bring them
hither; here are my tresses to crown; bring lustral water too. Dance
to Artemis, queen Artemis the blest, around her fane and altar; for
by the blood of my sacrifice I will blot out the oracle, if it needs
must be. 

O mother, lady revered! for thee shall my tears be shed, and now;
for at the holy rites I may not weep. 

Sing with me, maidens, sing the praises of Artemis, whose temple faces
Chalcis, where angry spearmen madly chafe, here in the narrow havens
of Aulis, because of me. 

O Pelasgia, land of my birth, and Mycenae, my home! 

CHORUS Is it on Perseus' citadel thou callest, that town Cyclopean
workmen build 

IPHIGENIA To be a light to Hellas didst thou rear me, and so I say
not No to death. 

CHORUS Thou art right; no fear that fame will e'er desert thee!

IPHIGENIA Hail to thee, bright lamp of day and light of Zeus! A different
life, different lot is henceforth mine. Farewell I bid thee, light
beloved!  (Exit IPHIGENIA.)  

CHORUS Behold the maiden on her way, the destroyer of Ilium's town
and its Phrygians, with garlands twined about her head, and drops
of lustral water on her, soon to besprinkle with her gushing blood
the altar of a murderous goddess, what time her shapely neck is severed.

For thee fair streams of a father's pouring and lustral waters are
in store, for thee Achaea's host is waiting, eager to reach the citadel
of Ilium. But let us celebrate Artemis, the daughter of Zeus, queen
among the gods, as if upon some happy chance. 

O lady revered, delighting in human sacrifice, send on its way to
Phrygia's land the host of the Hellenes, to Troy's abodes of guile,
and grant that Agamemnon may wreathe his head with deathless fame,
a crown of fairest glory for the spearmen of Hellas.  (Enter MESSENGER.)

MESSENGER Come forth, O Clytaemnestra, daughter of Tyndareus, from
the tent, to hear my news.  (Enter CLYTAEMNESTRA.)  

CLYTAEMNESTRA I heard thy voice and am come in sad dismay and fearful
dread, not sure but what thou hast arrived with tidings of some fresh
trouble for me besides the present woe. 

MESSENGER Nay, rather would I unfold to thee a story strange and
marvellous about thy child. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Delay not, then, but speak at once. 

MESSENGER Dear mistress, thou shalt learn all clearly; from the outset
will I tell it, unless my memory fail me somewhat and confuse my tongue
in its account. As soon as we reached the grove of Artemis, the child
of Zeus, and the meadows gay with flowers, where the Achaean troops
were gathered, bringing thy daughter with us, forthwith the Argive
host began assembling; but when king Agamemnon saw the maiden on her
way to the grove to be sacrificed, he gave one groan, and, turning
away his face, let the tears burst from his eyes, as he held his robe
before them. But the maid, standing close by him that begot her, spake
on this wise, "O my father, here am I to do thy bidding; freely I
offer this body of mine for my country and all Hellas, that ye may
lead me to the altar of the goddess and sacrifice me, since this is
Heaven's ordinance. Good luck be yours for any help that I afford!
and may ye obtain the victor's gift and come again to the land of
your fathers. So then let none of the Argives lay hands on me, for
I will bravely yield my neck without a word." 

She spake; and each man marvelled, as he heard the maiden's brave,
unflinching speech. But in the midst up stood Talthybius-for his this
duty was-and bade the host refrain from word or deed; and Calchas,
the seer, drawing a sharp sword from out its scabbard laid it in a
basket of beaten gold, crowning the maiden's head the while. Then
the son of Peleus, taking the basket and with it lustral water in
his hand, ran round the altar of the goddess uttering these words,
"O Artemis, thou child of Zeus, slayer of wild beasts, that wheelest
thy dazzling light amid the gloom, accept this sacrifice, which we,
the host of the Achaeans and king Agamemnon with us, offer to thee,
even pure blood from a beauteous maiden's neck; and grant us safe
sailing for our ships and the sack of Troy's towers by our spears."

Meantime the sons of Atreus and all the host stood looking on the
ground, while the priest, seizing his knife, offered up a prayer and
was closely scanning the maiden's throat to see where he should strike.
'Twas no slight sorrow filled my heart, as I stood by with bowed head;
when lo! a sudden miracle! Each one of us distinctly heard the sound
of a blow, but none saw the spot where the maiden vanished. Loudly
the priest cried out, and all the host took up the cry at the sight
of a marvel all unlooked for, due to some god's agency, and passing
all belief, although 'twas seen; for there upon the ground lay a hind
of size immense and passing fair to sec, gasping out her life, with
whose blood the altar of the goddess was thoroughly bedewed. Whereon
spake Calchas thus-his joy thou canst imagine-"Ye captains of this
leagued Achaean host, do ye see this victim, which the goddess has
set before her altar, a mountain roaming hind? This is more welcome
to her by far than the maid, that she may not defile her altar by
shedding noble blood. Gladly has she accepted it and is granting us
a prosperous voyage for our attack on Ilium. Wherefore take heart,
sailors, each man of you, and away to your ships, for to-day must
we leave the hollow bays of Aulis and cross the Aegean main."

Then, when the sacrifice was wholly burnt to ashes in the blazing
flame, he offered such prayers as were meet, that the army might win
return; but me Agamemnon sends to tell thee this, and say what Heaven-sent
luck is his, and how he hath secured undying fame throughout the length
of Hellas. Now I was there myself and speak as an eye-witness; without
a doubt thy child flew away to the gods. A truce then to thy sorrowing,
and cease to be wroth with thy husband; for God's ways with man are
not what we expect, and those whom he loves, he keepeth safe; yea,
for this day hath seen thy daughter dead and brought to life again.
(Exit MESSENGER.)  

CHORUS What joy to hear these tidings from the messenger! He tells
thee thy child is living still, among the gods. 

CLYTAEMNESTRA Which of the gods, my child, hath stolen thee? How
am I to address thee? How can I be sure that this is not an idle tale
told to cheer me, to make me cease my piteous lamentation for thee?

CHORUS Lo! king Agamemnon approaches, to confirm this story for thee.
(Enter AGAMEMNON.)  

AGAMEMNON Happy may we be counted, lady, as far as concerns our daughter;
for she hath fellowship with gods in very sooth. But thou must take
this tender babe and start for home, for the host is looking now to
sail. Fare thee well! 'tis long ere I shall greet thee on my return
from Troy; may it be well with thee! 

CHORUS Son of Atreus, start for Phrygia's land with joy and so return,
I pray, after taking from Troy her fairest spoils.  (Exeunt OMNES.)

 THEEND

 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before MEDEA's house in Corinth, near the palace Of CREON. The NURSE
enters from the house.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

NURSE Ah! Would to Heaven the good ship Argo ne'er had sped its
course to the Colchian land through the misty blue Symplegades, nor
ever in the glens of Pelion the pine been felled to furnish with oars
the chieftain's hands, who went to fetch the golden fleece for Pelias;
for then would my own mistress Medea never have sailed to the turrets
of Iolcos, her soul with love for Jason smitten, nor would she have
beguiled the daughters of Pelias to slay their father and come to
live here in the land of Corinth with her husband and children, where
her exile found favour with the citizens to whose land she had come,
and in all things of her own accord was she at one with Jason, the
greatest safeguard this when wife and husband do agree; but now their
love is all turned to hate, and tenderest ties are weak. For Jason
hath betrayed his own children and my mistress dear for the love of
a royal bride, for he hath wedded the daughter of Creon, lord of this
land. While Medea, his hapless wife, thus scorned, appeals to the
oaths he swore, recalls the strong pledge his right hand gave, and
bids heaven be witness what requital she is finding from Jason. And
here she lies fasting, yielding her body to her grief, wasting away
in tears ever since she learnt that she was wronged by her husband,
never lifting her eye nor raising her face from off the ground; and
she lends as deaf an ear to her friend's warning as if she were a
rock or ocean billow, save when she turns her snow-white neck aside
and softly to herself bemoans her father dear, her country and her
home, which she gave up to come hither with the man who now holds
her in dishonour. She, poor lady, hath by sad experience learnt how
good a thing it is never to quit one's native land. And she hates
her children now and feels no joy at seeing them; I fear she may contrive
some untoward scheme; for her mood is dangerous nor will she brook
her cruel treatment; full well I know her, and I much do dread that
she will plunge the keen sword through their hearts, stealing without
a word into the chamber where their marriage couch is spread, or else
that she will slay the prince and bridegroom too, and so find some
calamity still more grievous than the present; for dreadful is her
wrath; verily the man that doth incur her hate will have no easy task
to raise o'er her a song of triumph. Lo! where her sons come hither
from their childish sports; little they reck of their mother's woes,
for the soul of the young is no friend to sorrow.  (The ATTENDANT
leads in MEDEA'S children.)  

ATTENDANT Why dost thou, so long my lady's own handmaid, stand here
at the gate alone, loudly lamenting to thyself the piteous tale? how
comes it that Medea will have thee leave her to herself?

NURSE Old man, attendant on the sons of Jason, our masters' fortunes
when they go awry make good slaves grieve and touch their hearts.
Oh! have come to such a pitch of grief that there stole a yearning
wish upon me to come forth hither and proclaim to heaven and earth
my mistress's hard fate. 

ATTENDANT What! has not the poor lady ceased yet from her lamentation?

NURSE Would I were as thou art! the mischief is but now beginning;
it has not reached its climax yet. 

ATTENDANT O foolish one, if I may call my mistress such a name; how
little she recks of evils yet more recent! 

NURSE What mean'st, old man? grudge not to tell me. 

ATTENDANT 'Tis naught; I do repent me even of the words I have spoken.

NURSE Nay, by thy beard I conjure thee, hide it not from thy fellow-slave;
will be silent, if need be, on that text. 

ATTENDANT I heard one say, pretending not to listen as I approached
the place where our greybeards sit playing draughts near Pirene's
sacred spring, that Creon, the ruler of this land, is bent on driving
these children and their mother from the boundaries of Corinth; but
I know not whether the news is to be relied upon, and would fain it
were not. 

NURSE What! will Jason brook such treatment of his sons, even though
he be at variance with their mother? 

ATTENDANT Old ties give way to new; he bears no longer any love to
this family. 

NURSE Undone, it seems, are we, if to old woes fresh ones we add,
ere we have drained the former to the dregs. 

ATTENDANT Hold thou thy peace, say not a word of this; 'tis no time
for our mistress to learn hereof. 

NURSE O children, do ye hear how your father feels towards you? Perdition
catch him, but no he is my master still; yet is he proved a very traitor
to his nearest and dearest. 

ATTENDANT And who 'mongst men is not? Art learning only now, that
every single man cares for himself more than for his neighbour, some
from honest motives, others for mere gain's sake? seeing that to indulge
his passion their father has ceased to love these children.

NURSE Go, children, within the house; all will be well. Do thou keep
them as far away as may be, and bring them not near their mother in
her evil hour. For ere this have I seen her eyeing them savagely,
as though she were minded to do them some hurt, and well I know she
will not cease from her fury till she have pounced on some victim.
At least may she turn her hand against her foes, and not against her
friends. 

MEDEA  (chanting within) Ah, me! a wretched suffering woman I! O
would that I could die! 

NURSE  (chanting) 'Tis as I said, my dear children; wild fancies
stir your mother's heart, wild fury goads her on. Into the house without
delay, come not near her eye, approach her not, beware her savage
mood, the fell tempest of her reckless heart. In, in with what speed
ye may. For 'tis plain she will soon redouble her fury; that cry is
but the herald of the gathering storm-cloud whose lightning soon will
flash; what will her proud restless soul, in the anguish of despair,
be guilty of?  (The ATTENDANT takes the children into the house. MEDEA
(chanting within)  Ah, me! the agony I have suffered, deep enough
to call for these laments! Curse you and your father too, ye children
damned, sons of a doomed mother! Ruin seize the whole family!

NURSE  (chanting) Ah me! ah me! the pity of it! Why, pray, do thy
children share their father's crime? Why hatest thou them? Woe is
you, poor children, how do I grieve for you lest ye suffer some outrage!
Strange are the tempers of princes, and maybe because they seldom
have to obey, and mostly lord it over others, change they their moods
with difficulty. 'Tis better then to have been trained to live on
equal terms. Be it mine to reach old age, not in proud pomp, but in
security! Moderation wins the day first as a better word for men to
use, and likewise it is far the best course for them to pursue; but
greatness that doth o'erreach itself, brings no blessing to mortal
men; but pays a penalty of greater ruin whenever fortune is wroth
with a family.  (The CHORUS enters. The following lines between the
NURSE, CHORUS, and MEDEA are sung.)  

CHORUS I heard the voice, uplifted loud, of our poor Colchian lady,
nor yet is she quiet; speak, aged dame, for as I stood by the house
with double gates I heard a voice of weeping from within, and I do
grieve, lady, for the sorrows of this house, for it hath won my love.

NURSE 'Tis a house no more; all that is passed away long since; a
royal bride keeps Jason at her side, while our mistress pines away
in her bower, finding no comfort for her soul in aught her friends
can say. 

MEDEA  (within) Oh, oh! Would that Heaven's levin bolt would cleave
this head in twain! What gain is life to me? Woe, woe is me! O, to
die and win release, quitting this loathed existence! 

CHORUS Didst hear, O Zeus, thou earth, and thou, O light, the piteous
note of woe the hapless wife is uttering? How shall a yearning for
that insatiate resting-place ever hasten for thee, poor reckless one,
the end that death alone can bring? Never pray for that. And if thy
lord prefers a fresh love, be not angered with him for that; Zeus
will judge 'twixt thee and him herein. Then mourn not for thy husband's
loss too much, nor waste thyself away. 

MEDEA  (within) Great Themis, and husband of Themis, behold what
I am suffering now, though I did bind that accursed one, my husband,
by strong oaths to me! O, to see him and his bride some day brought
to utter destruction, they and their house with them, for that they
presume to wrong me thus unprovoked. O my father, my country, that
I have left to my shame, after slaying my own brother. 

NURSE Do ye hear her words, how loudly she adjures Themis, oft invoked,
and Zeus, whom men regard as keeper of their oaths? On no mere trifle
surely will our mistress spend her rage. 

CHORUS Would that she would come forth for us to see, and listen
to the words of counsel we might give, if haply she might lay aside
the fierce fury of her wrath, and her temper stern. Never be my zeal
at any rate denied my friends! But go thou and bring her hither outside
the house, and tell her this our friendly thought; haste thee ere
she do some mischief to those inside the house, for this sorrow of
hers is mounting high. 

NURSE This will I do; but I doubt whether I shall persuade my mistress;
still willingly will I undertake this trouble for you; albeit, she
glares upon her servants with the look of a lioness with cubs, whenso
anyone draws nigh to speak to her. Wert thou to call the men of old
time rude uncultured boors thou wouldst not err, seeing that they
devised their hymns for festive occasions, for banquets, and to grace
the board, a pleasure to catch the ear, shed o'er our life, but no
man hath found a way to allay hated grief by music and the minstrel's
varied strain, whence arise slaughters and fell strokes of fate to
o'erthrow the homes of men. And yet this were surely a gain, to heal
men's wounds by music's spell, but why tune they their idle song where
rich banquets are spread? For of itself doth the rich banquet, set
before them, afford to men delight. 

CHORUS I heard a bitter cry of lamentation! loudly, bitterly she
calls on the traitor of her marriage bed, her perfidious spouse; by
grievous wrongs oppressed she invokes Themis, bride of Zeus, witness
of oaths, who brought her unto Hellas, the land that fronts the strand
of Asia, o'er the sea by night through ocean's boundless gate.  (As
the CHORUS finishes its song, MEDEA enters from the house.)

MEDEA From the house I have come forth, Corinthian ladies, for fear
lest you be blaming me; for well I know that amongst men many by showing
pride have gotten them an ill name and a reputation for indifference,
both those who shun men's gaze and those who move amid the stranger
crowd, and likewise they who choose a quiet walk in life. For there
is no just discernment in the eyes of men, for they, or ever they
have surely learnt their neighbour's heart, loathe him at first sight,
though never wronged by him; and so a stranger most of all should
adopt a city's views; nor do I commend that citizen, who, in the stubbornness
of his heart, from churlishness resents the city's will.

But on me hath fallen this unforeseen disaster, and sapped my life;
ruined I am, and long to resign the boon of existence, kind friends,
and die. For he who was all the world to me, as well thou knowest,
hath turned out the worst of men, my own husband. Of all things that
have life and sense we women are the most hapless creatures; first
must we buy a husband at a great price, and o'er ourselves a tyrant
set which is an evil worse than the first; and herein lies the most
important issue, whether our choice be good or bad. For divorce is
not honourable to women, nor can we disown our lords. Next must the
wife, coming as she does to ways and customs new, since she hath not
learnt the lesson in her home, have a diviner's eye to see how best
to treat the partner of her life. If haply we perform these tasks
with thoroughness and tact, and the husband live with us, without
resenting the yoke, our life is a happy one; if not, 'twere best to
die. But when a man is vexed with what he finds indoors, he goeth
forth and rids his soul of its disgust, betaking him to some friend
or comrade of like age; whilst we must needs regard his single self.

And yet they say we live secure at home, while they are at the wars,
with their sorry reasoning, for I would gladly take my stand in battle
array three times o'er, than once give birth. But enough! this language
suits not thee as it does me; thou hast a city here, a father's house,
some joy in life, and friends to share thy thoughts, but I am destitute,
without a city, and therefore scorned by my husband, a captive I from
a foreign shore, with no mother, brother, or kinsman in whom to find
a new haven of refuge from this calamity. Wherefore this one boon
and only this I wish to win from thee,-thy silence, if haply I can
some way or means devise to avenge me on my husband for this cruel
treatment, and on the man who gave to him his daughter, and on her
who is his wife. For though woman be timorous enough in all else,
and as regards courage, a coward at the mere sight of steel, yet in
the moment she finds her honour wronged, no heart is filled with deadlier
thoughts than hers. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS This will I do; for thou wilt be taking a just
vengeance on thy husband, Medea. That thou shouldst mourn thy lot
surprises me not. But lo! I see Creon, king of this land coming hither,
to announce some new resolve.  (CREON enters, with his retinue.)

CREON Hark thee, Medea, I bid thee take those sullen looks and angry
thoughts against thy husband forth from this land in exile, and with
thee take both thy children and that without delay, for I am judge
in this sentence, and I will not return unto my house till I banish
thee beyond the borders of the land. 

MEDEA Ah, me! now is utter destruction come upon me, unhappy that
I am! For my enemies are bearing down on me full sail, nor have I
any landing-place to come at in my trouble. Yet for all my wretched
plight I will ask thee, Creon, wherefore dost thou drive me from the
land? 

CREON I fear thee,-no longer need I veil my dread 'neath words,-lest
thou devise against my child some cureless ill. Many things contribute
to this fear of mine; thou art a witch by nature, expert in countless
sorceries, and thou art chafing for the loss of thy husband's affection.
I hear, too, so they tell me, that thou dost threaten the father of
the bride, her husband, and herself with some mischief; wherefore
I will take precautions ere our troubles come. For 'tis better for
me to incur thy hatred now, lady, than to soften my heart and bitterly
repent it hereafter. 

MEDEA Alas! this is not now the first time, but oft before, O Creon,
hath my reputation injured me and caused sore mischief. Wherefore
whoso is wise in his generation ought never to have his children taught
to be too clever; for besides the reputation they get for idleness,
they purchase bitter odium from the citizens. For if thou shouldst
import new learning amongst dullards, thou wilt be thought a useless
trifler, void of knowledge; while if thy fame in the city o'ertops
that of the pretenders to cunning knowledge, thou wilt win their dislike.
I too myself share in this ill-luck. Some think me clever and hate
me, others say I am too reserved, and some the very reverse; others
find me hard to please and not so very clever after all. Be that as
it may, thou dost fear me lest I bring on thee something to mar thy
harmony. Fear me not, Creon, my position scarce is such that should
seek to quarrel with princes. Why should I, for how hast thou injured
me? Thou hast betrothed thy daughter where thy fancy prompted thee.
No, 'tis my husband I hate, though I doubt not thou hast acted wisely
herein. And now I grudge not thy prosperity; betroth thy child, good
luck to thee, but let me abide in this land, for though I have been
wronged I will be still and yield to my superiors. 

CREON Thy words are soft to hear, but much I dread lest thou art
devising some mischief in thy heart, and less than ever do I trust
thee now; for cunning woman, and man likewise, is easier to guard
against when quick-tempered than when taciturn. Nay, begone at once!
speak me no speeches, for this is decreed, nor hast thou any art whereby
thou shalt abide amongst us, since thou hatest me. 

MEDEA O, say not so! by thy knees and by thy daughter newlywed, I
do implore! 

CREON Thou wastest words; thou wilt never persuade me. 

MEDEA What, wilt thou banish me, and to my prayers no pity yield?

CREON I will, for I love not thee above my own family. 

MEDEA O my country! what fond memories I have of thee in this hour!

CREON Yea, for I myself love my city best of all things save my children.

MEDEA Ah me! ah me! to mortal man how dread a scourge is love!

CREON That, I deem, is according to the turn our fortunes take.

MEDEA O Zeus! let not the author of these my troubles escape thee.

CREON Begone, thou silly woman, and free me from my toil.

MEDEA The toil is mine, no lack of it. 

CREON Soon wilt thou be thrust out forcibly by the hand of servants.

MEDEA Not that, not that, I do entreat thee, Creon 

CREON Thou wilt cause disturbance yet, it seems. 

MEDEA I will begone; I ask thee not this boon to grant.

CREON Why then this violence? why dost thou not depart?

MEDEA Suffer me to abide this single day and devise some plan for
the manner of my exile, and means of living for my children, since
their father cares not to provide his babes therewith. Then pity them;
thou too hast children of thine own; thou needs must have a kindly
heart. For my own lot I care naught, though I an exile am, but for
those babes I weep, that they should learn what sorrow means.

CREON Mine is a nature anything but harsh; full oft by showing pity
have suffered shipwreck; and now albeit I clearly see my error, yet
shalt thou gain this request, lady; but I do forewarn thee, if tomorrow's
rising sun shall find thee and thy children within the borders of
this land, thou diest; my word is spoken and it will not lie. So now,
if abide thou must, stay this one day only, for in it thou canst not
do any of the fearful deeds I dread.  (CREON and his retinue go out.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Ah! poor lady, woe is thee! Alas, for thy sorrows!
Whither wilt thou turn? What protection, what home or country to save
thee from thy troubles wilt thou find? O Medea, in what a hopeless
sea of misery heaven hath plunged thee! 

MEDEA On all sides sorrow pens me in. Who shall gainsay this? But
all is not yet lost! think not so. Still are there troubles in store
for the new bride, and for her bridegroom no light toil. Dost think
I would ever have fawned on yonder man, unless to gain some end or
form some scheme? Nay, would not so much as have spoken to him or
touched him with my hand. But he has in folly so far stepped in that,
though he might have checked my plot by banishing me from the land,
he hath allowed me to abide this day, in which I will lay low in death
three of my enemies-a father and his daughter and my husband too.
Now, though I have many ways to compass their death, I am not sure,
friends, which I am to try first. Shall I set fire to the bridal mansion,
or plunge the whetted sword through their hearts, softly stealing
into the chamber where their couch is spread? One thing stands in
my way. If I am caught making my way into the chamber, intent on my
design, I shall be put to death and cause my foes to mock, 'Twere
best to take the shortest way-the way we women are most skilled in-by
poison to destroy them. Well, suppose them dead; what city will receive
me? What friendly host will give me a shelter in his land, a home
secure, and save my soul alive? None. So I will wait yet a little
while in case some tower of defence rise up for me; then will I proceed
to this bloody deed in crafty silence; but if some unexpected mischance
drive me forth, I will with mine own hand seize the sword, e'en though
I die for it, and slay them, and go forth on my bold path of daring.
By that dread queen whom I revere before all others and have chosen
to share my task, by Hecate who dwells within my inmost chamber, not
one of them shall wound my heart and rue it not. Bitter and sad will
I make their marriage for them; bitter shall be the wooing of it,
bitter my exile from the land. Up, then, Medea, spare not the secrets
of thy art in plotting and devising; on to the danger. Now comes a
struggle needing courage. Dost see what thou art suffering? 'Tis not
for thee to be a laughing-stock to the race of Sisyphus by reason
of this wedding of Jason, sprung, as thou art, from noble sire, and
of the Sun-god's race. Thou hast cunning; and, more than this, we
women, though by nature little apt for virtuous deeds, are most expert
to fashion any mischief. 

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Back to their source the holy rivers turn their tide. Order and the
universe are being reversed. 'Tis men whose counsels are treacherous,
whose oath by heaven is no longer sure. Rumour shall bring a change
o'er my life, bringing it into good repute. Honour's dawn is breaking
for woman's sex; no more shall the foul tongue of slander fix upon
us. 

(antistrophe 1)

The songs of the poets of old shall cease to make our faithlessness
their theme. Phoebus, lord of minstrelsy, hath not implanted in our
mind the gift of heavenly song, else had I sung an answering strain
to the race of males, for time's long chapter affords many a theme
on their sex as well as ours. 

(strophe 2)

With mind distraught didst thou thy father's house desert on thy
voyage betwixt ocean's twin rocks, and on a foreign strand thou dwellest
thy bed left husbandless, poor lady, and thou an exile from the land,
dishonoured, persecuted. 

(antistrophe 2)

Gone is the grace that oaths once had. Through all the breadth of
Hellas honour is found no more; to heaven hath it sped away. For thee
no father's house is open, woe is thee! to be a haven from the troublous
storm, while o'er thy home is set another queen, the bride that is
preferred to thee.  (As the CHORUS finishes its song, JASON enters,
alone. MEDEA comes out of the house.)  

JASON It is not now I first remark, but oft ere this, how unruly
a pest is a harsh temper. For instance, thou, hadst thou but patiently
endured the will of thy superiors, mightest have remained here in
this land and house, but now for thy idle words wilt thou be banished.
Thy words are naught to me. Cease not to call Jason basest of men;
but for those words thou hast spoken against our rulers, count it
all gain that exile is thy only punishment. I ever tried to check
the outbursts of the angry monarch, and would have had thee stay,
but thou wouldst not forego thy silly rage, always reviling our rulers,
and so thou wilt be banished. Yet even after all this I weary not
of my goodwill, but am come with thus much forethought, lady, that
thou mayst not be destitute nor want for aught, when, with thy sons,
thou art cast out. Many an evil doth exile bring in its train with
it; for even though thou hatest me, never will I harbour hard thoughts
of thee. 

MEDEA Thou craven villain (for that is the only name my tongue can
find for thee, a foul reproach on thy unmanliness), comest thou to
me, thou, most hated foe of gods, of me, and of all mankind? 'Tis
no proof of courage or hardihood to confront thy friends after injuring
them, but that worst of all human diseases-loss of shame. Yet hast
thou done well to come; for I shall ease my soul by reviling thee,
and thou wilt be vexed at my recital. I will begin at the very beginning.
I saved thy life, as every Hellene knows who sailed with thee aboard
the good ship Argo, when thou wert sent to tame and yoke fire-breathing
bulls, and to sow the deadly tilth. Yea, and I slew the dragon which
guarded the golden fleece, keeping sleepless watch o'er it with many
a wreathed coil, and I raised for thee a beacon of deliverance. Father
and home of my free will I left and came with the to Iolcos, 'neath
Pelion's hills, for my love was stronger than my prudence. Next I
caused the death of Pelias by a doom most grievous, even by his own
children's hand, beguiling them of all their fear. All this have I
done for thee, thou traitor! and thou hast cast me over, taking to
thyself another wife, though children have been born to us. Hadst
thou been childless still, I could have pardoned thy desire for this
new union. Gone is now the trust I put in oaths. I cannot even understand
whether thou thinkest that the gods of old no longer rule, or that
fresh decrees are now in vogue amongst mankind, for thy conscience
must tell thee thou hast not kept faith with me. Ah! poor right hand,
which thou didst often grasp. These knees thou didst embrace! All
in vain, I suffered a traitor to touch me! How short of my hopes I
am fallen! But come, I will deal with the as though thou wert my friend.
Yet what kindness can I expect from one so base as thee? But yet I
will do it, for my questioning will show thee yet more base. Whither
can I turn me now? to my father's house, to my own country, which
I for thee deserted to come hither? to the hapless daughters of Pelias?
A glad welcome, I trow, would they give me in their home, whose father's
death I compassed! My case stands even thus: I am become the bitter
foe to those of mine own home, and those whom I need ne'er have wronged
I have made mine enemies to pleasure thee. Wherefore to reward me
for this thou hast made me doubly blest in the eyes of many wife in
Hellas; and in thee I own a peerless, trusty lord. O woe is me, if
indeed I am to be cast forth an exile from the land, without one friend;
one lone woman with her babes forlorn! Yea, a fine reproach to thee
in thy bridal hour, that thy children and the wife who saved thy life
are beggars and vagabonds! O Zeus! why hast thou granted unto man
clear signs to know the sham in gold, while on man's brow no brand
is stamped whereby to gauge the villain's heart? 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS There is a something terrible and past all cure,
when quarrels arise 'twixt those who are near and dear. 

JASON Needs must I now, it seems, turn orator, and, like a good helmsman
on a ship with close-reefed sails, weather that wearisome tongue of
thine. Now, I believe, since thou wilt exaggerate thy favours, that
to Cypri, alone of gods or men I owe the safety of my voyage. Thou
hast a subtle wit enough; yet were it a hateful thing for me to say
that the Love-god constrained thee by his resistless shaft to save
my life. However, I will not reckon this too nicely; 'twas kindly
done, however thou didst serve me. Yet for my safety hast thou received
more than ever thou gavest, as I will show. First, thou dwellest in
Hellas, instead of thy barbarian land, and hast learnt what justice
means and how to live by law, not by the dictates of brute force;
and all the Hellenes recognize thy cleverness, and thou hast gained
a name; whereas, if thou hadst dwelt upon the confines of the earth,
no tongue had mentioned thee. Give me no gold within my halls, nor
skill to sing a fairer strain than ever Orpheus sang, unless there-with
my fame be spread abroad! So much I say to thee about my own toils,
for 'twas thou didst challenge me to this retort. As for the taunts
thou urgest against my marriage with the princess, I will prove to
thee, first, that I am prudent herein, next chastened in my love,
and last powerful friend to thee and to thy sons; only hold thy peace.
Since I have here withdrawn from Iolcos with many a hopeless trouble
at my back, what happier device could I, an exile, frame than marriage
with the daughter of the king? 'Tis not because I loathe thee for
my wife-the thought that rankles in thy heart; 'tis not because I
am smitten with desire for a new bride, nor yet that I am eager to
vie with others in begetting many children, for those we have are
quite enough, and I do not complain. Nay, 'tis that we-and this is
most important-may dwell in comfort, instead of suffering want  (for
well I know that every whilom friend avoids the poor)  , and that
I might rear my sons as doth befit my house; further, that I might
be the father of brothers for the children thou hast borne, and raise
these to the same high rank, uniting the family in one,-to my lasting
bliss. Thou, indeed, hast no need of more children, but me it profits
to help my present family by that which is to be. Have I miscarried
here? Not even thou wouldest say so unless a rival's charms rankled
in thy bosom. No, but you women have such strange ideas, that you
think all is well so long as your married life runs smooth; but if
some mischance occur to ruffle your love, all that was good and lovely
erst you reckon as your foes. Yea, men should have begotten children
from some other source, no female race existing; thus would no evil
ever have fallen on mankind. 

LEADER This speech, O Jason, hast thou with specious art arranged;
but yet I think-albeit in speaking I am indiscreet-that thou hast
sinned in thy betrayal of thy wife. 

MEDEA No doubt I differ from the mass of men on many points; for,
to my mind, whoso hath skill to fence with words in an unjust cause,
incurs the heaviest penalty; for such an one, confident that he can
cast a decent veil of words o'er his injustice, dares to practise
it; and yet he is not so very clever after all. So do not thou put
forth thy specious pleas and clever words to me now, for one word
of mine will lay thee low. Hadst thou not had a villain's heart, thou
shouldst have gained my consent, then made this match, instead of
hiding it from those who loved thee. 

JASON Thou wouldest have lent me ready aid, no doubt, in this proposal,
if had told thee of my marriage, seeing that not even now canst thou
restrain thy soul's hot fury. 

MEDEA This was not what restrained thee; but thine eye was turned
towards old age, and a foreign wife began to appear a shame to thee.

JASON Be well assured of this: 'twas not for the woman's sake I wedded
the king's daughter, my present wife; but, as I have already told
thee, I wished to insure thy safety and to be the father of royal
sons bound by blood to my own children-a bulwark to our house.

MEDEA May that prosperity, whose end is woe, ne'er be mine, nor such
wealth as would ever sting my heart! 

JASON Change that prayer as I will teach thee, and thou wilt show
more wisdom. Never let happiness appear in sorrow's guise, nor, when
thy fortune smiles, pretend she frowns! 

MEDEA Mock on; thou hast a place of refuge; I am alone, an exile
soon to be. 

JASON Thy own free choice was this; blame no one else. 

MEDEA What did I do? Marry, then betray thee? 

JASON Against the king thou didst invoke an impious curse.

MEDEA On thy house too maybe I bring the curse. 

JASON Know this, I will no further dispute this point with thee.
But, if thou wilt of my fortune somewhat take for the children or
thyself to help thy exile, say on; for I am ready to grant it with
ungrudging hand, yea and to bend tokens to my friends elsewhere who
shall treat thee well. If thou refuse this offer, thou wilt do a foolish
deed, but if thou cease from anger the greater will be thy gain.

MEDEA I will have naught to do with friends of thine, naught will
I receive of thee, offer it not to me; a villain's gifts can bring
no blessing. 

JASON At least I call the gods to witness, that I am ready in all
things to serve thee and thy children, but thou dost scorn my favours
and thrustest thy friends stubbornly away; wherefore thy lot will
be more bitter still. 

MEDEA Away! By love for thy young bride entrapped, too long thou
lingerest outside her chamber; go wed, for, if God will, thou shalt
have such a marriage as thou wouldst fain refuse.  (JASON goes out.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

When in excess and past all limits Love doth come, he brings not
glory or repute to man; but if the Cyprian queen in moderate might
approach, no goddess is so full of charm as she. Never, O never, lady
mine, discharge at me from thy golden bow a shaft invincible, in passion's
venom dipped. 

(antistrophe 1)

On me may chastity, heaven's fairest gift, look with a favouring
eye; never may Cypris, goddess dread, fasten on me a temper to dispute,
or restless jealousy, smiting my soul with mad desire for unlawful
love, but may she hallow peaceful married life and shrewdly decide
whom each of us shall wed. 

(strophe 2)

O my country, O my own dear home! God grant I may never be an outcast
from my city, leading that cruel helpless life, whose every day is
misery. Ere that may I this life complete and yield to death, ay,
death; for there is no misery that doth surpass the loss of fatherland.

(antistrophe 2)

I have seen with mine eyes, nor from the lips of others have I the
lesson learnt; no city, not one friend doth pity thee in this thine
awful woe. May he perish and find no favour, whoso hath not in him
honour for his friends, freely unlocking his heart to them. Never
shall he be friend of mine.  (MEDEA has been seated in despair on
her door-step during the choral song. AEGEUS and his attendants enter.)

AEGEUS All hail, Medea! no man knoweth fairer prelude to the greeting
of friends than this. 

MEDEA All hail to thee likewise, Aegeus, son of wise Pandion. Whence
comest thou to this land? 

AEGEUS From Phoebus' ancient oracle. 

MEDEA What took thee on thy travels to the prophetic centre of the
earth? 

AEGEUS The wish to ask how I might raise up seed unto myself.

MEDEA Pray tell me, hast thou till now dragged on a childless life?

AEGEUS I have no child owing to the visitation of some god.

MEDEA Hast thou a wife, or hast thou never known the married state?

AEGEUS I have a wife joined to me in wedlock's bond. 

MEDEA What said Phoebus to thee as to children? 

AEGEUS Words too subtle for man to comprehend. 

MEDEA Surely I may learn the god's answer? 

AEGEUS Most assuredly, for it is just thy subtle wit it needs.

MEDEA What said the god? speak, if I may hear it. 

AEGEUS He bade me "not loose the wineskin's pendent neck."

MEDEA Till when? what must thou do first, what country visit?

AEGEUS Till I to my native home return. 

MEDEA What object hast thou in sailing to this land? 

AEGEUS O'er Troezen's realm is Pittheus king. 

MEDEA Pelops' son, a man devout they say. 

AEGEUS To him I fain would impart the oracle of the god.

MEDEA The man is shrewd and versed in such-like lore. 

AEGEUS Aye, and to me the dearest of all my warrior friends.

MEDEA Good luck to thee! success to all thy wishes! 

AEGEUS But why that downcast eye, that wasted cheek? 

MEDEA O Aegeus, my husband has proved most evil. 

AEGEUS What meanest thou? explain to me clearly the cause of thy
despondency. 

MEDEA Jason is wronging me though I have given him no cause.

AEGEUS What hath he done? tell me more clearly. 

MEDEA He is taking another wife to succeed me as mistress of his
house. 

AEGEUS Can he have brought himself to such a dastard deed?

MEDEA Be assured thereof; I, whom he loved of yore, am in dishonour
now. 

AEGEUS Hath he found a new love? or does he loathe thy bed?

MEDEA Much in love is he! A traitor to his friend is he become.

AEGEUS Enough! if he is a villain as thou sayest. 

MEDEA The alliance he is so much enamoured of is with a princess.

AEGEUS Who gives his daughter to him? go on, I pray. 

MEDEA Creon, who is lord of this land of Corinth. 

AEGEUS Lady, I can well pardon thy grief. 

MEDEA I am undone, and more than that, am banished from the land.

AEGEUS By whom? fresh woe this word of thine unfolds. 

MEDEA Creon drives me forth in exile from Corinth. 

AEGEUS Doth Jason allow it? This too I blame him for. 

MEDEA Not in words, but he will not stand out against it. O, I implore
thee by this beard and by thy knees, in suppliant posture, pity, O
pity my sorrows; do not see me cast forth forlorn, but receive me
in thy country, to a seat within thy halls. So may thy wish by heaven's
grace be crowned with a full harvest of offspring, and may thy life
close in happiness! Thou knowest not the rare good luck thou findest
here, for I will make thy childlessness to cease and cause thee to
beget fair issue; so potent are the spells I know. 

AEGEUS Lady, on many grounds I am most fain to grant thee this thy
boon, first for the gods' sake, next for the children whom thou dost
promise I shall beget; for in respect of this I am completely lost.
'Tis thus with me; if e'er thou reach my land, I will attempt to champion
thee as I am bound to do. Only one warning I do give thee first, lady;
I will not from this land bear thee away, yet if of thyself thou reach
my halls, there shalt thou bide in safety and I will never yield thee
up to any man. But from this land escape without my aid, for I have
no wish to incur the blame of my allies as well. 

MEDEA It shall be even so; but wouldst thou pledge thy word to this,
I should in all be well content with thee. 

AEGEUS Surely thou dost trust me? or is there aught that troubles
thee? 

MEDEA Thee I trust; but Pelias' house and Creon are my foes. Wherefore,
if thou art bound by an oath, thou wilt not give me up to them when
they come to drag me from the land, but, having entered into a compact
and sworn by heaven as well, thou wilt become my friend and disregard
their overtures. Weak is any aid of mine, whilst they have wealth
and a princely house. 

AEGEUS Lady, thy words show much foresight, so if this is thy will,
I do not, refuse. For I shall feel secure and safe if I have some
pretext to offer to thy foes, and thy case too the firmer stands.
Now name thy gods. 

MEDEA Swear by the plain of Earth, by Helios my father's sire, and,
in one comprehensive oath, by all the race of gods. 

AEGEUS What shall I swear to do, from what refrain? tell me that.

MEDEA Swear that thou wilt never of thyself expel me from thy land,
nor, whilst life is thine, permit any other, one of my foes maybe,
to hale me thence if so he will. 

AEGEUS By Earth I swear, by the Sun-god's holy beam and by all the
host of heaven that I will stand fast to the terms I hear thee make.

MEDEA 'Tis enough. If thou shouldst break this oath, what curse dost
thou invoke upon thyself? 

AEGEUS Whate'er betides the impious. 

MEDEA Go in peace; all is well, and I with what speed I may, will
to thy city come, when I have wrought my purpose and obtained my wish.
(AEGEUS and his retinue depart.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) May Maia's princely son go with thee on thy way
to bring thee to thy home, and mayest thou attain that on which thy
soul is set so firmly, for to my mind thou seemest a generous man,
O Aegeus. 

MEDEA O Zeus, and Justice, child of Zeus, and Sun-god's light, now
will triumph o'er my foes, kind friends; on victory's road have I
set forth; good hope have I of wreaking vengeance on those I hate.
For where we were in most distress this stranger hath appeared, to
be a haven in my counsels; to him will we make fast the cables of
our ship when we come to the town and citadel of Pallas. But now will
I explain to thee my plans in full; do not expect to hear a pleasant
tale. A servant of mine will I to Jason send and crave an interview;
then when he comes I will address him with soft words, say, "this
pleases me," and, "that is well," even the marriage with the princess,
which my treacherous lord is celebrating, and add "it suits us both,
'twas well thought out"; then will I entreat that here my children
may abide, not that I mean to leave them in a hostile land for foes
to flout, but that I may slay the king's daughter by guile. For I
will send them with gifts in their hands, carrying them unto the bride
to save them from banishment, a robe of finest woof and a chaplet
of gold. And if these ornaments she take and put them on, miserably
shall she die, and likewise everyone who touches her; with such fell
poisons will I smear my gifts. And here I quit this theme; but I shudder
at the deed I must do next; for I will slay the children I have borne;
there is none shall take them from my toils; and when I have utterly
confounded Jason's house I will leave the land, escaping punishment
for my dear children's murder, after my most unholy deed. For I cannot
endure the taunts of enemies, kind friends; enough! what gain is life
to me? I have no country, home, or refuge left. O, I did wrong, that
hour I left my father's home, persuaded by that Hellene's words, who
now shall pay the penalty, so help me God, Never shall he see again
alive the children I bore to him, nor from his new bride shall he
beget issue, for she must die a hideous death, slain by my drugs.
Let no one deem me a poor weak woman who sits with folded hands, but
of another mould, dangerous to foes and well-disposed to friends;
for they win the fairest fame who live then, life like me.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Since thou hast imparted this design to me,
I bid thee hold thy hand, both from a wish to serve thee and because
I would uphold the laws men make. 

MEDEA It cannot but be so; thy words I pardon since thou art not
in the same sorry plight that I am. 

LEADER O lady, wilt thou steel thyself to slay thy children twain?

MEDEA I will, for that will stab my husband to the heart.

LEADER It may, but thou wilt be the saddest wife alive.

MEDEA No matter; wasted is every word that comes 'twixt now and then.
Ho!  (The NURSE enters in answer to her call.)  Thou, go call me Jason
hither, for thee I do employ on every mission of trust. No word divulge
of all my purpose, as thou art to thy mistress loyal and likewise
of my sex.  (The NURSE goes out.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Sons of Erechtheus, heroes happy from of yore, children of the blessed
gods, fed on wisdom's glorious food in a holy land ne'er pillaged
by its foes, ye who move with sprightly step through a climate ever
bright and clear, where, as legend tells, the Muses nine, Pieria's
holy maids, were brought to birth by Harmonia with the golden hair.

(antistrophe 1)

And poets sing how Cypris drawing water from the streams of fair-flowing
Cephissus breathes o'er the land a gentle breeze of balmy winds, and
ever as she crowns her tresses with a garland of sweet rose-buds sends
forth the Loves to sit by wisdom's side, to take part in every excellence.

(strophe 2)

How then shall the city of sacred streams, the land that welcomes
those it loves, receive thee, the murderess of thy children, thee
whose presence with others is a pollution? 'Think on the murder of
thy children, consider the bloody deed thou takest on thee. Nay, by
thy knees we, one and all, implore thee, slay not thy babes.

(antistrophe 2)

Where shall hand or heart find hardihood enough in wreaking such
a fearsome deed upon thy sons? How wilt thou look upon thy babes,
and still without a tear retain thy bloody purpose? Thou canst not,
when they fall at thy feet for mercy, steel thy heart and dip in their
blood thy hand.  (JASON enters.)  

JASON I am come at thy bidding, for e'en though thy hate for me is
bitter thou shalt not fail in this small boon, but I will hear what
new request thou hast to make of me, lady. 

MEDEA Jason, I crave thy pardon for the words I spoke, and well thou
mayest brook my burst of passion, for ere now we twain have shared
much love. For I have reasoned with my soul and railed upon me thus,
"Ah! poor heart! why am I thus distraught, why so angered 'gainst
all good advice, why have I come to hate the rulers of the land, my
husband too, who does the best for me he can, in wedding with a princess
and rearing for my children noble brothers? Shall I not cease to fret?
What possesses me, when heaven its best doth offer? Have I not my
children to consider? do I forget that we are fugitives, in need of
friends?" When I had thought all this I saw how foolish I had been,
how senselessly enraged. So now do commend thee and think thee most
wise in forming this connection for us; but I was mad, I who should
have shared in these designs, helped on thy plans, and lent my aid
to bring about the match, only too pleased to wait upon thy bride.
But what we are, we are, we women, evil I will not say; wherefore
thou shouldst not sink to our sorry level nor with our weapons meet
our childishness. 

I yield and do confess that I was wrong then, but now have I come
to a better mind. Come hither, my children, come, leave the house,
step forth, and with me greet and bid farewell to your father, be
reconciled from all past bitterness unto your friends, as now your
mother is; for we have made a truce and anger is no more.  (The ATTENDANT
comes out of the house with the children.)  Take his right hand; ah
me! my sad fate! when I reflect, as now, upon the hidden future. O
my children, since there awaits you even thus a long, long life, stretch
forth the hand to take a fond farewell. Ah me! how new to tears am
I, how full of fear! For now that I have at last released me from
my quarrel with your father, I let the tear-drops stream adown my
tender cheek. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS From my eyes too bursts forth the copious tear;
O, may no greater ill than the present e'er befall! 

JASON Lady, I praise this conduct, not that I blame what is past;
for it is but natural to the female sex to vent their spleen against
a husband when he trafficks in other marriages besides his own. But
thy heart is changed to wiser schemes and thou art determined on the
better course, late though it be; this is acting like a woman of sober
sense. And for you, my sons, hath your father provided with all good
heed a sure refuge, by God's grace; for ye, I trow, shall with your
brothers share hereafter the foremost rank in this Corinthian realm.
Only grow up, for all the rest your sire and whoso of the gods is
kind to us is bringing to pass. May I see you reach man's full estate,
high o'er the heads of those I hate! But thou, lady, why with fresh
tears dost thou thine eyelids wet, turning away thy wan cheek, with
no welcome for these my happy tidings? 

MEDEA 'Tis naught; upon these children my thoughts were turned.

JASON Then take heart; for I will see that it is well with them.

MEDEA I will do so; nor will I doubt thy word; woman is a weak creature,
ever given to tears. 

JASON Why prithee, unhappy one, dost moan o'er these children?

MEDEA I gave them birth; and when thou didst pray long life for them,
pity entered into my soul to think that these things must be. But
the reason of thy coming hither to speak with me is partly told, the
rest will I now mention. Since it is the pleasure of the rulers of
the land to banish me, and well I know 'twere best for me to stand
not in the way of thee or of the rulers by dwelling here, enemy as
I am thought unto their house, forth from this land in exile am I
going, but these children,-that they may know thy fostering hand,
beg Creon to remit their banishment. 

JASON I doubt whether I can persuade him, yet must I attempt it.

MEDEA At least do thou bid thy wife ask her sire this boon, to remit
the exile of the children from this land. 

JASON Yea, that will I; and her methinks I shall persuade, since
she is woman like the rest. 

MEDEA I too will aid thee in this task, for by the children's hand
I will send to her gifts that far surpass in beauty, I well know,
aught that now is seen 'mongst men, a robe of finest tissue and a
chaplet of chased gold. But one of my attendants must haste and bring
the ornaments hither.  (A servant goes into the house.)  Happy shall
she be not once alone but ten thousand-fold, for in thee she wins
the noblest soul to share her love, and gets these gifts as well which
on a day my father's sire, the Sun-god, bestowed on his descendants.
(The servant returns and hands the gifts to the children.)  My children,
take in your hands these wedding gifts, and bear them as an offering
to the royal maid, the happy bride; for verily the gifts she shall
receive are not to be scorned. 

JASON But why so rashly rob thyself of these gifts? Dost think a
royal palace wants for robes or gold? Keep them, nor give them to
another. For well I know that if my lady hold me in esteem, she will
set my price above all wealth. 

MEDEA Say not so; 'tis said that gifts tempt even gods; and o'er
men's minds gold holds more potent sway than countless words. Fortune
smiles upon thy bride, and heaven now doth swell her triumph; youth
is hers and princely power; yet to save my children from exile I would
barter life, not dross alone. Children, when we are come to the rich
palace, pray your father's new bride, my mistress, with suppliant
voice to save you from exile, offering her these ornaments the while;
for it is most needful that she receive the gifts in her own hand.
Now go and linger not; may ye succeed and to your mother bring back
the glad tidings she fain would hear  (JASON, the ATTENDANT, and the
children go out together.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

Gone, gone is every hope I had that the children yet might live;
forth to their doom they now proceed. The hapless bride will take,
ay, take the golden crown that is to be her ruin; with her own hand
will she lift and place upon her golden locks the garniture of death.

(antistrophe 1)

Its grace and sheen divine will tempt her to put on the robe and
crown of gold, and in that act will she deck herself to be a bride
amid the dead. Such is the snare whereinto she will fall, such is
the deadly doom that waits the hapless maid, nor shall she from the
curse escape. 

(strophe 2)

And thou, poor wretch, who to thy sorrow art wedding a king's daughter,
little thinkest of the doom thou art bringing on thy children's life,
or of the cruel death that waits thy bride. Woe is thee! how art thou
fallen from thy high estate! 

(antistrophe 2)

Next do I bewail thy sorrows, O mother hapless in thy children, thou
who wilt slay thy babes because thou hast a rival, the babes thy husband
hath deserted impiously to join him to another bride.  (The ATTENDANT
enters with the children.)  

ATTENDANT Thy children, lady, are from exile freed, and gladly did
the royal bride accept thy gifts in her own hands, and so thy children
made their peace with her. 

MEDEA Ah! 

ATTENDANT Why art so disquieted in thy prosperous hour? Why turnest
thou thy cheek away, and hast no welcome for my glad news?

MEDEA Ah me! 

ATTENDANT These groans but ill accord with the news I bring.

MEDEA Ah me! once more I say. 

ATTENDANT Have I unwittingly announced some evil tidings? Have I
erred in thinking my news was good? 

MEDEA Thy news is as it is; I blame thee not. 

ATTENDANT Then why this downcast eye, these floods of tears?

MEDEA Old friend, needs must I weep; for the gods and I with fell
intent devised these schemes. 

ATTENDANT Be of good cheer; thou too of a surety shalt by thy sons
yet be brought home again. 

MEDEA Ere that shall I bring others to their home, ah! woe is me

ATTENDANT Thou art not the only mother from thy children reft. Bear
patiently thy troubles as a mortal must. 

MEDEA I will obey; go thou within the house and make the day's provision
for the children.  (The ATTENDANT enters the house. MEDEA turns to
the children.)  O my babes, my babes, ye have still a city and a home,
where far from me and my sad lot you will live your lives, reft of
your mother for ever; while I must to another land in banishment,
or ever I have had my joy of you, or lived to see you happy, or ever
I have graced your marriage couch, your bride, your bridal bower,
or lifted high the wedding torch. Ah me! a victim of my own self-will.
So it was all in vain I reared you, O my sons; in vain did suffer,
racked with anguish, enduring the cruel pangs of childbirth. 'Fore
Heaven I once had hope, poor me! high hope of ye that you would nurse
me in my age and deck my corpse with loving hands, a boon we mortals
covet; but now is my sweet fancy dead and gone; for I must lose you
both and in bitterness and sorrow drag through life. And ye shall
never with fond eyes see your mother more for o'er your life there
comes a change. Ah me! ah me! why do ye look at me so, my children?
why smile that last sweet smile? Ah me! what am I to do? My heart
gives way when I behold my children's laughing eyes. O, I cannot;
farewell to all my former schemes; I will take the children from the
land, the babes I bore. Why should I wound their sire by wounding
them, and get me a twofold measure of sorrow? No, no, I will not do
it. Farewell my scheming! And yet what possesses me? Can I consent
to let those foes of mine escape from punishment, and incur their
mockery? I must face this deed. Out upon my craven heart! to think
that I should even have let the soft words escape my soul. Into the
house, children!  (The children go into the house.)  And whoso feels
he must not be present at my sacrifice, must see to it himself; I
will not spoil my handiwork. Ah! ah! do not, my heart, O do not do
this deed! Let the children go, unhappy one, spare the babes! For
if they live, they will cheer thee in our exile there. Nay, by the
fiends of hell's abyss, never, never will I hand my children over
to their foes to mock and flout. Die they must in any case, and since
'tis so, why I, the mother who bore them, will give the fatal blow.
In any case their doom is fixed and there is no escape. Already the
crown is on her head, the robe is round her, and she is dying, the
royal bride; that do I know full well. But now since I have a piteous
path to tread, and yet more piteous still the path I send my children
on, fain would I say farewell to them.  (The children come out at
her call. She takes them in her arms.)  O my babes, my babes, let
your mother kiss your hands. Ah! hands I love so well, O lips most
dear to me! O noble form and features of my children, I wish ye joy,
but in that other land, for here your father robs you of your home.
O the sweet embrace, the soft young cheek, the fragrant breath! my
children! Go, leave me; I cannot bear to longer look upon ye; my sorrow
wins the day. At last I understand the awful deed I am to do; but
passion, that cause of direst woes to mortal man, hath triumphed o'er
my sober thoughts.  (She goes into the house with the children.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Oft ere now have I pursued subtler themes and
have faced graver issues than woman's sex should seek to probe; but
then e'en we aspire to culture, which dwells with us to teach us wisdom;
I say not all; for small is the class amongst women-(one maybe shalt
thou find 'mid many)-that is not incapable of wisdom. And amongst
mortals I do assert that they who are wholly without experience and
have never had children far surpass in happiness those who are parents.
The childless, because they have never proved whether children grow
up to be a blessing or curse to men are removed from all share in
many troubles; whilst those who have a sweet race of children growing
up in their houses do wear away, as I perceive, their whole life through;
first with the thought how they may train them up in virtue, next
how they shall leave their sons the means to live; and after all this
'tis far from clear whether on good or bad children they bestow their
toil. But one last crowning woe for every mortal man now will name;
suppose that they have found sufficient means to live, and seen their
children grow to man's estate and walk in virtue's path, still if
fortune so befall, comes Death and bears the children's bodies off
to Hades. Can it be any profit to the gods to heap upon us mortal
men beside our other woes this further grief for children lost, a
grief surpassing all?  (MEDEA comes out of the house.)  

MEDEA Kind friends, long have I waited expectantly to know how things
would at the palace chance. And lo! I see one of Jason's servants
coming hither, whose hurried gasps for breath proclaim him the bearer
of some fresh tidings.  (A MESSENGER rushes in.)  

MESSENGER Fly, fly, Medea! who hast wrought an awful deed, transgressing
every law: nor leave behind or sea-borne bark or car that scours the
plain. 

MEDEA Why, what hath chanced that calls for such a flight of mine?

MESSENGER The princess is dead, a moment gone, and Creon too, her
sire, slain by those drugs of thine. 

MEDEA Tidings most fair are thine! Henceforth shalt thou be ranked
amongst my friends and benefactors. 

MESSENGER Ha! What? Art sane? Art not distraught, lady, who hearest
with joy the outrage to our royal house done, and art not at the horrid
tale afraid? 

MEDEA Somewhat have I, too, to say in answer to thy words. Be not
so hasty, friend, but tell the manner of their death, for thou wouldst
give me double joy, if so they perished miserably. 

MESSENGER When the children twain whom thou didst bear came with
their father and entered the palace of the bride, right glad were
we thralls who had shared thy griefs, for instantly from ear to ear
a rumour spread that thou and thy lord had made up your former quarrel.
One kissed thy children's hands, another their golden hair, while
I for very joy went with them in person to the women's chambers. Our
mistress, whom now we do revere in thy room, cast a longing glance
at Jason, ere she saw thy children twain; but then she veiled her
eyes and turned her blanching cheek away, disgusted at their coming;
but thy husband tried to check his young bride's angry humour with
these words: "O, be not angered 'gainst thy friends; cease from wrath
and turn once more thy face this way, counting as friends whomso thy
husband counts, and accept these gifts, and for my sake crave thy
sire to remit these children's exile." Soon as she saw the ornaments,
no longer she held out, but yielded to her lord in all; and ere the
father and his sons were far from the palace gone, she took the broidered
robe and put it on, and set the golden crown about her tresses, arranging
her hair at her bright mirror, with many a happy smile at her breathless
counterfeit. Then rising from her seat she passed across the chamber,
tripping lightly on her fair white foot, exulting in the gift, with
many a glance at her uplifted ankle. When lo! a scene of awful horror
did ensue. In a moment she turned pale, reeled backwards, trembling
in every limb, and sinks upon a seat scarce soon enough to save herself
from falling to the ground. An aged dame, one of her company, thinking
belike it was a fit from Pan or some god sent, raised a cry of prayer,
till from her mouth she saw the foam-flakes issue, her eyeballs rolling
in their sockets, and all the blood her face desert; then did she
raise a loud scream far different from her former cry. Forthwith one
handmaid rushed to her father's house, another to her new bridegroom
to tell his bride's sad fate, and the whole house echoed with their
running to and fro. By this time would a quick walker have made the
turn in a course of six plethra and reached the goal, when she with
one awful shriek awoke, poor sufferer, from her speechless trance
and oped her closed eyes, for against her a twofold anguish was warring.
The chaplet of gold about her head was sending forth a wondrous stream
of ravening flame, while the fine raiment, thy children's gift, was
preying on the hapless maiden's fair white flesh; and she starts from
her seat in a blaze and seeks to fly, shaking her hair and head this
way and that, to cast the crown therefrom; but the gold held firm
to its fastenings, and the flame, as she shook her locks, blazed forth
the more with double fury. Then to the earth she sinks, by the cruel
blow o'ercome; past all recognition now save to a father's eye; for
her eyes had lost their tranquil gaze, her face no more its natural
look preserved, and from the crown of her head blood and fire in mingled
stream ran down; and from her bones the flesh kept peeling off beneath
the gnawing of those secret drugs, e'en as when the pine-tree weeps
its tears of pitch, a fearsome sight to see. And all were afraid to
touch the corpse, for we were warned by what had chanced. Anon came
her haples father unto the house, all unwitting of her doom, and stumbles
o'er the dead, and loud he cried, and folding his arms about her kissed
her, with words like these the while, "O my poor, poor child, which
of the gods hath destroyed thee thus foully? Who is robbing me of
thee, old as I am and ripe for death? O my child, alas! would I could
die with thee!" He ceased his sad lament, and would have raised his
aged frame, but found himself held fast by the fine-spun robe as ivy
that clings to the branches of the bay, and then ensued a fearful
struggle. He strove to rise, but she still held him back; and if ever
he pulled with all his might, from off his bones his aged flesh he
tore. At last he gave it up, and breathed forth his soul in awful
suffering; for he could no longer master the pain. So there they lie,
daughter and aged sire, dead side by side, a grievous sight that calls
for tears. And as for thee, I leave thee out of my consideration,
for thyself must discover a means to escape punishment. Not now for
the first time I think this human life a shadow; yea, and without
shrinking I will say that they amongst men who pretend to wisdom and
expend deep thought on words do incur a serious charge of folly; for
amongst mortals no man is happy; wealth may pour in and make one luckier
than another, but none can happy be.  (The MESSENGER departs.)

LEADER OF THE CHORUS This day the deity, it seems, will mass on Jason,
as he well deserves, heavy load of evils. Woe is thee, daughter of
Creon We pity thy sad fate, gone as thou art to Hades' halls as the
price of thy marriage with Jason. 

MEDEA My friends, I am resolved upon the deed; at once will I slay
my children and then leave this land, without delaying long enough
to hand them over to some more savage hand to butcher. Needs must
they die in any case; and since they must, I will slay them-I, the
mother that bare them. O heart of mine, steel thyself! Why do I hesitate
to do the awful deed that must be done? Come, take the sword, thou
wretched hand of mine! Take it, and advance to the post whence starts
thy life of sorrow! Away with cowardice! Give not one thought to thy
babes, how dear they are or how thou art their mother. This one brief
day forget thy children dear, and after that lament; for though thou
wilt slay them yet they were thy darlings still, and I am a lady of
sorrows.  (MEDEA enters the house.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) O earth, O sun whose beam illumines all, look,
look upon this lost woman, ere she stretch forth her murderous hand
upon her sons for blood; for lo! these are scions of thy own golden
seed, and the blood of gods is in danger of being shed by man. O light,
from Zeus proceeding, stay her, hold her hand, forth from the house
chase this fell bloody fiend by demons led. Vainly wasted were the
throes thy children cost thee; vainly hast thou borne, it seems, sweet
babes, O thou who hast left behind thee that passage through the blue
Symplegades, that strangers justly hate. Ah! hapless one, why doth
fierce anger thy soul assail? Why in its place is fell murder growing
up? For grievous unto mortal men are pollutions that come of kindred
blood poured on the earth, woes to suit each crime hurled from heaven
on the murderer's house. 

FIRST SON  (within) Ah, me; what can I do? Whither fly to escape
my mother's blows? 

SECOND SON  (within) I know not, sweet brother mine; we are lost.

CHORUS  (chanting) Didst hear, didst hear the children's cry? O lady,
born to sorrow, victim of an evil fate! Shall I enter the house? For
the children's sake I am resolved to ward off the murder.

FIRST SON  (within) Yea, by heaven I adjure you; help, your aid is
needed. 

SECOND SON  (within) Even now the toils of the sword are closing
round us. 

CHORUS  (chanting) O hapless mother, surely thou hast a heart of
stone or steel to slay the offspring of thy womb by such a murderous
doom. Of all the wives of yore I know but one who laid her hand upon
her children dear, even Ino, whom the gods did madden in the day that
the wife of Zeus drove her wandering from her home. But she, poor
sufferer, flung herself into the sea because of the foul murder of
her children, leaping o'er the wave-beat cliff, and in her death was
she united to her children twain. Can there be any deed of horror
left to follow this? Woe for the wooing of women fraught with disaster!
What sorrows hast thou caused for men ere now!  (JASON and his attendants
enter.)  

JASON Ladies, stationed near this house, pray tell me is the author
of these hideous deeds, Medea, still within, or hath she fled from
hence? For she must hide beneath the earth or soar on wings towards
heaven's vault, if she would avoid the vengeance of the royal house.
Is she so sure she will escape herself unpunished from this house,
when she hath slain the rulers of the land? But enough of this! I
am forgetting her children. As for her, those whom she hath wronged
will do the like by her; but I am come to save the children's life,
lest the victim's kin visit their wrath on me, in vengeance for the
murder foul, wrought by my children's mother. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Unhappy man, thou knowest not the full extent
of thy misery, else had thou never said those words. 

JASON How now? Can she want to kill me too? 

LEADER Thy sons are dead; slain by their own mother's hand.

JASON O God! what sayest thou? Woman, thou hast sealed my doom.

LEADER Thy children are no more; be sure of this. 

JASON Where slew she them; within the palace or outside?

LEADER Throw wide the doors and see thy children's murdered corpses.

JASON Haste, ye slaves, loose the bolts, undo the fastenings, that
I may see the sight of twofold woe, my murdered sons and her, whose
blood in vengeance I will shed.  (MEDEA appears above the house, on
a chariot drawn by dragons; the children's corpses are beside her.)

MEDEA Why shake those doors and attempt to loose their bolts, in
quest of the dead and me their murderess? From such toil desist. If
thou wouldst aught with me, say on, if so thou wilt; but never shalt
thou lay hand on me, so swift the steeds the sun, my father's sire,
to me doth give to save me from the hand of my foes. 

JASON Accursed woman! by gods, by me and all mankind abhorred as
never woman was, who hadst the heart to stab thy babes, thou their
mother, leaving me undone and childless; this hast thou done and still
dost gaze upon the sun and earth after this deed most impious. Curses
on thee! now perceive what then I missed in the day I brought thee,
fraught with doom, from thy home in a barbarian land to dwell in Hellas,
traitress to thy sire and to the land that nurtured thee. On me the
gods have hurled the curse that dogged thy steps, for thou didst slay
thy brother at his hearth ere thou cam'st aboard our fair ship, Argo.
Such was the outset of thy life of crime; then didst thou wed with
me, and having borne me sons to glut thy passion's lust, thou now
hast slain them. Not one amongst the wives of Hellas e'er had dared
this deed; yet before them all I chose thee for my wife, wedding a
foe to be my doom, no woman, but a lioness fiercer than Tyrrhene Scylla
in nature. But with reproaches heaped thousandfold I cannot wound
thee, so brazen is thy nature. Perish, vile sorceress, murderess of
thy babes! Whilst I must mourn my luckless fate, for I shall ne'er
enjoy my new-found bride, nor shall I have the children, whom I bred
and reared, alive to say the last farewell to me; nay, I have lost
them. 

MEDEA To this thy speech I could have made a long reply, but Father
Zeus knows well all I have done for thee, and the treatment thou hast
given me. Yet thou wert not ordained to scorn my love and lead a life
of joy in mockery of me, nor was thy royal bride nor Creon, who gave
thee a second wife, to thrust me from this land and rue it not. Wherefore,
if thou wilt, call me e'en a lioness, and Scylla, whose home is in
the Tyrrhene land; for I in turn have wrung thy heart, as well I might.

JASON Thou, too, art grieved thyself, and sharest in my sorrow.

MEDEA Be well assured I am; but it relieves my pain to know thou
canst not mock at me. 

JASON O my children, how vile a mother ye have found! 

MEDEA My sons, your father's feeble lust has been your ruin!

JASON 'Twas not my hand, at any rate, that slew them. 

MEDEA No, but thy foul treatment of me, and thy new marriage.

JASON Didst think that marriage cause enough to murder them?

MEDEA Dost think a woman counts this a trifling injury?

JASON So she be self-restrained; but in thy eyes all is evil.

MEDEA Thy sons are dead and gone. That will stab thy heart.

JASON They live, methinks, to bring a curse upon thy head.

MEDEA The gods know, whoso of them began this troublous coil.

JASON Indeed, they know that hateful heart of thine. 

MEDEA Thou art as hateful. I am aweary of thy bitter tongue.

JASON And I likewise of thine. But parting is easy. 

MEDEA Say how; what am I to do? for I am fain as thou to go.

JASON Give up to me those dead, to bury and lament. 

MEDEA No, never! I will bury them myself, bearing them to Hera's
sacred field, who watches o'er the Cape, that none of their foes may
insult them by pulling down their tombs; and in this land of Sisyphus
I will ordain hereafter a solemn feast and mystic rites to atone for
this impious murder. Myself will now to the land of Erechtheus, to
dwell with Aegeus, Pandion's son. But thou, as well thou mayst, shalt
die a caitiff's death, thy head crushed 'neath a shattered relic of
Argo, when thou hast seen the bitter ending of my marriage.

JASON The curse of our sons' avenging spirit and of justice, that
calls for blood, be on thee! 

MEDEA What god or power divine hears thee, breaker of oaths and every
law of hospitality? 

JASON Fie upon thee! cursed witch! child-murderess! 

MEDEA To thy house! go, bury thy wife. 

JASON I go, bereft of both my sons. 

MEDEA Thy grief is yet to come; wait till old age is with thee too.

JASON O my dear, dear children! 

MEDEA Dear to their mother, not to thee. 

JASON And yet thou didst slay them? 

MEDEA Yea, to vex thy heart. 

JASON One last fond kiss, ah me! I fain would on their lips imprint.

MEDEA Embraces now, and fond farewells for them; but then a cold
repulse! 

JASON By heaven I do adjure thee, let me touch their tender skin.

MEDEA No, no! in vain this word has sped its flight. 

JASON O Zeus, dost hear how I am driven hence; dost mark the treatment
I receive from this she-lion, fell murderess of her young? Yet so
far as I may and can, I raise for them a dirge, and do adjure the
gods to witness how thou hast slain my sons, and wilt not suffer me
to embrace or bury their dead bodies. Would I had never begotten them
to see thee slay them after all!  (The chariot carries MEDEA away.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Many a fate doth Zeus dispense, high on his Olympian
throne; oft do the gods bring things to pass beyond man's expectation;
that, which we thought would be, is not fulfilled, while for the unlooked-for
god finds out a way; and such hath been the issue of this matter.

 THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the royal palace at Argos. It is the sixth day after the murder
of Clytemnestra and Aegisthus. ELECTRA is discovered alone. ORESTES
lies sleeping on a couch in the background.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

ELECTRA There is naught so terrible to describe, be it physical
pain or heaven-sent affliction, that man's nature may not have to
bear the burden of it. Tantalus, they say, once so prosperous,-and
I am not now taunting him with his misfortunes,-Tantalus, the reputed
son of Zeus, hangs suspended in mid air, quailing at the crag which
looms above his head; paying this penalty, they say, for the shameful
weakness he displayed in failing to keep a bridle on his lips, when
admitted by gods, though he was but mortal, to share the honours of
their feasts like one of them. 

He it was that begat Pelops, the father of Atreus, for whom the goddess,
when she had carded her wool, spun a web of strife, even to the making
of war with his own brother Thyestes. But why need I repeat that hideous
tale? 

Well, Atreus slew Thyestes' children and feasted him on them; but,-passing
over intermediate events-from Atreus and Aerope of Crete sprang Agamemnon,
that famous chief,-if his was really fame,-and Menelaus. Now it was
this Menelaus who married Helen, Heaven's abhorrence; while his brother,
King Agamemnon, took Clytemnestra to wife, name of note in Hellas,
and we three daughters were his issue, Chrysothemis, Iphigenia, and
myself Electra; also a son Orestes; all of that one accursed mother,
who slew her lord, after snaring him in a robe that had no outlet.
Her reason a maiden's lips may not declare, and so leave that unexplained
for the world to guess at. What need for me to charge Phoebus with
wrong-doing, though he instigated Orestes to slay his own mother,
a deed that few approved; still it was his obedience to the god that
made him slay her; I, too, feebly as a woman would, shared in the
deed of blood, as did Pylades who helped us to bring it about.

After this my poor Orestes fell sick of a cruel wasting disease; upon
his couch he lies prostrated, and it is his mother's blood that goads
him into frenzied fits; this I say, from dread of naming those goddesses,
whose terrors are chasing him before them,-even the Eumenides. 'Tis
now the sixth day since the body of his murdered mother was committed
to the cleansing fire; since then no food has passed his lips, nor
hath he washed his skin; but wrapped in his cloak he weeps in his
lucid moments, whenever the fever leaves him; other whiles he bounds
headlong from his couch, as colt when it is loosed from the yoke.
Moreover, this city of Argos has decreed that no man give us shelter
at his fireside or speak to matricides like us; yea, and this is the
fateful day on which Argos will decide our sentence, whether we are
both to die by stoning, or to whet the steel and plunge it in our
necks. There is, 'tis true, one hope of escape still left us; Menelaus
has landed from Troy; his fleet now crowds the haven of Nauplia where
he is come to anchor, returned at last from Troy after ceaseless wanderings;
but Helen, that "lady of sorrows," as she styles herself, hath he
sent on to our palace, carefully waiting for the night, lest any of
those parents whose sons were slain beneath the walls of Troy, might
see her if she went by day, and set to stoning her. Within she sits,
weeping for her sister and the calamities of her family, and yet she
hath still some solace in her woe; for Hermione, the child she left
at home in the hour she sailed for Troys-the maid whom Menelaus brought
from Sparta and entrusted to my mother's keeping,-is still a cause
of joy to her and a reason to forget her sorrows. 

I, meantime, am watching each approach, against the moment I see Menelaus
arriving; for unless we find some safety there, we have but feeble
anchor to ride on otherwise. 

A helpless thing, an unlucky house!  (HELEN enters from the palace.)

HELEN Daughter of Clytemnestra and Agamemnon, hapless Electra, too
long now left a maid unwed! how is it with thee and thy brother, this
ill-starred Orestes who slew his mother! Speak; for referring the
sin as I do to Phoebus, I incur no pollution by letting thee accost
me; and yet am truly sorry for the fate of my sister Clytenmestra,
on whom I ne'er set eyes after I was driven by heaven-sent frenzy
to sail on my disastrous voyage to Ilium; but now that I am parted
from her I bewail our misfortunes. 

ELECTRA Prithee, Helen, why should I speak of that which thine own
eyes can see the son of Agamemnon in his misery? 

Beside his wretched corpse I sit, a sleepless sentinel; for corpse
he is, so faint his breath; not that I reproach him with his sufferings;
but thou art highly blest and thy husband too, and ye are come upon
us in the hour of adversity. 

HELEN How long hath he been laid thus upon his couch? 

ELECTRA Ever since he spilt his mother's blood-. 

HELEN Unhappy wretch! unhappy mother! what a death she died!

ELECTRA Unhappy enough to succumb to his misery. 

HELEN Prithee, maiden, wilt hear me a moment? 

ELECTRA Aye, with such small leisure as this watching o'er a brother
leaves. 

HELEN Wilt go for me to my sister's tomb? 

ELECTRA Wouldst have me seek my mother's tomb? And why?

HELEN To carry an offering of hair and a libation from me.

ELECTRA Art forbidden then to go to the tombs of those thou lovest?

HELEN Nay, but I am ashamed to show myself in Argos. 

ELECTRA A late repentance surely for one who left her home so shamefully
then. 

HELEN Thou hast told the truth, but thy telling is not kind to me.

ELECTRA What is this supposed modesty before the eyes of Mycenae
that possesses thee? 

HELEN I am afraid of the fathers of those who lie dead beneath the
walls of Ilium. 

ELECTRA Good cause for fear; thy name is on every tongue in Argos.

HELEN Then free me of my fear and grant me this boon. 

ELECTRA I could not bear to face my mother's grave. 

HELEN And yet 'twere shame indeed to send these offerings by a servant's
hand. 

ELECTRA Then why not send thy daughter Hermione? 

HELEN 'Tis not seemly for a tender maid to make her way amongst a
crowd. 

ELECTRA And yet she would thus be repaying her dead foster-mother's
care. 

HELEN True; thou hast convinced me, maiden. Yes, I will send my daughter;
for thou art right.  (Calling)  Hermione, my child, come forth before
the palace;  (HERMIONE and attendants come out of the palace.)  take
these libations and these tresses of mine in thy hands, and go pour
round Clytemnestra's tomb a mingled cup of honey, milk, and frothing
wine; then stand upon the heaped-up grave, and proclaim therefrom,
"Helen, thy sister, sends thee these libations as her gift, fearing
herself to approach thy tomb from terror of the Argive mob"; and bid
her harbour kindly thoughts towards me and thee and my husband; towards
these two wretched sufferers, too, whom Heaven hath afflicted. Likewise
promise that I will pay in full whatever funeral gifts are due from
me to a sister. Now go, my child, and tarry not; and soon as thou
hast made the offering at the tomb, bethink thee of thy return.  (HELEN
goes into the palace as HERMIONE and her attendants depart with the
offerings.)  

ELECTRA O human nature, what a grievous curse thou art in this world!
and what salvation, too, to those who have a goodly heritage therein!

Did ye mark how she cut off her hair only at the ends, careful to
preserve its beauty? 'Tis the same woman as of old. May Heaven's hate
pursue thee! for thou hast proved the ruin of me and my poor brother
and all Hellas. 

Alack! here are my friends once more, coming to unite their plaintive
dirge with mine; they will soon put an end to my brother's peaceful
sleep and cause my tears to flow when I see his frenzied fit.  (The
CHORUS OF ARGIVE MAIDENS enters quietly. The following lines between
ELECTRA and the CHORUS are chanted responsively.)  Good friends, step
softly; not a sound; not a whisper! for though this kindness is well-meant,
rouse him and I shall rue it. 

CHORUS Hush! hush! let your footsteps fall lightly! not a sound!
not whisper! 

ELECTRA Further, further from his couch! I beseech ye. 

CHORUS There! there! I obey. 

ELECTRA Hush! hush! good friend, I pray. Soft as the breath of slender
reedy pipe be thy every accent! 

CHORUS Hark, how soft and low I drop my voice! 

ELECTRA Yes, lower thy voice e'en thus; approach now, softly, softly!
Tell me what reason ye had for coming at all. 'Tis so long since he
laid him down to sleep. 

CHORUS How is it with him? Impart thy news, dear lady. Is it weal
or woe I am to tell? 

ELECTRA He is still alive, but his moans grow feeble. 

CHORUS What sayest thou?  (Turning to ORESTES)  Poor wretch!

ELECTRA Awake him from the deep sweet slumber he is now enjoying
and thou wilt cause his death. 

CHORUS Ah, poor sufferer! victim of Heaven's vengeful hate!

ELECTRA Ah, misery! It seems it was a wicked utterance by a wicked
god delivered, the day that Loxias from his seat upon the tripod of
Themis decreed my mother's most unnatural murder. 

CHORUS He stirs beneath his robe! Dost see? 

ELECTRA Alas! I do; thy noisy words have roused him from his sleep.

CHORUS Nay, methinks he slumbers still. 

ELECTRA Begone! quit the house! retrace thy footsteps! a truce to
this din! 

CHORUS He sleeps. Thou art right. 

ELECTRA O Night, majestic queen, giver of sleep to toiling men, rise
from the abyss of Erebus and wing thy way to the palace of Agamemnon!
For beneath our load of misery and woe we sink, aye, sink oppressed.

There!  (To the CHORUS)  that noise again! Be still and keep that
high-pitched voice of thine away from his couch; suffer him to enjoy
his sleep in peace! 

CHORUS Tell me, what end awaits his troubles? 

ELECTRA Death, death; what else? for he does not even miss his food.

CHORUS Why, then his doom is full in view. 

ELECTRA Phoebus marked us out as his victims by imposing a foul unnatural
task, even the shedding of the blood of our mother, who slew our sire.

CHORUS 'Twas just, but 'twas not well. 

ELECTRA Dead, dead, O mother mine! and thou hast slain a father and
these the children of thy womb; for we are dead or as the dead. Yes,
thou art in thy grave, and more than half my life is spent in weeping
and wailing and midnight lamentations; oh, look on me! a maid unwed,
unblest with babes, I drag out a joyless existence as if for ever.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS My daughter Electra, from thy near station there
see whether thy brother hath not passed away without thy knowing it;
for I like not his utter prostration. 

ORESTES  (awaking refreshed) Sweet charm of sleep! saviour in sickness!
how dear to me thy coming was! how needed! All hail, majestic power,
oblivion of woe! How wise this goddess is, how earnestly invoked by
every suffering soul!  (Addressing ELECTRA)  Whence came I hither?
How is it I am here? for I have lost all previous recollection and
remember nothing. 

ELECTRA Dearest brother, how glad I was to see thee fall asleep!
Wouldst have me take thee in my arms and lift thy body? 

ORESTES Take, oh! take me in thy arms, and from this sufferer's mouth
and eyes wipe off the flakes of foam. 

ELECTRA Ah! 'tis a service I love; nor do I scorn with sister's hand
to tend a brother's limbs. 

ORESTES Prop me up, thy side to mine; brush the matted hair from
off my face, for I see but dimly. 

ELECTRA Ah, poor head! how squalid are thy locks become! How wild
thy look from remaining so long uncleansed! 

ORESTES Lay me once more upon the couch; when my fit leaves me, I
am all unnerved, unstrung. 

ELECTRA  (as she lays him down) Welcome to the sick man is his couch,
for painful though it be to take thereto, yet is it necessary.

ORESTES Set me upright once again, turn me round; it is their helplessness
makes the sick so hard to please. 

ELECTRA Wilt put thy feet upon the ground and take a step at last?
Change is always pleasant. 

ORESTES That will I; for that has a semblance of health; and that
seeming, though it be far from the reality, is preferable to this.

ELECTRA Hear me then, O brother mine, while yet the avenging fiends
permit thee to use thy senses. 

ORESTES Hast news to tell? so it be good, thou dost me a kindness;
but if it tend to my hurt, lo! I have sorrow enough. 

ELECTRA Menelaus, thy father's brother, is arrived; in Nauplia his
fleet lies at anchor. 

ORESTES Ha! is he come to cast a ray of light upon our gloom, a man
of our own kin who owes our sire a debt of gratitude? 

ELECTRA Yes, he is come, and is bringing Helen with him from the
walls of Troy; accept this as a sure proof of what I say.

ORESTES Had he returned alone in safety, he were more to be envied;
for if he is bringing his wife with him, he is bringing a load of
evil. 

ELECTRA Tyndareus begat a race of daughters notorious for the shame
they earned, infamous throughout Hellas. 

ORESTES Be thou then different from that evil brood, for well thou
mayest, and that not only in profession, but also in heart.

ELECTRA Ah! brother, thine eye is growing wild, and in a moment art
thou passing from thy recent saneness back to frenzy. 

ORESTES  (starting up wildly) Mother, I implore thee! let not loose
on me those maidens with their bloodshot eyes and snaky hair. Ha!
see, see where they approach to leap upon me! 

ELECTRA Lie still, poor sufferer, on thy couch; thine eye sees none
of the things which thy fancy paints so clear. 

ORESTES O Phoebus! they will kill me, yon hounds of hell, death's
priestesses with glaring eyes, terrific goddesses. 

ELECTRA I will not let thee go; but with arms twined round thee will
prevent thy piteous tossing to and fro. 

ORESTES Loose me! thou art one of those fiends that plague me, and
art gripping me by the waist to hurl my body into Tartarus.

ELECTRA Woe is me! what succour can I find, seeing that we have Heaven's
forces set against us? 

ORESTES Give me my horn-tipped bow, Apollo's gift, wherewith that
god declared that I should defend myself against these goddesses,
if ever they sought to scare me with wild transports of madness.

A mortal hand will wound one of these goddesses, unless she vanish
from my sight. Do ye not heed me, or mark the feathered shaft of my
far-shooting bow ready to wing its flight? What! do ye linger still?
Spread your pinions, skim the sky, and blame those oracles of Phoebus.

Ah! why am I raving, panting, gasping? Whither, oh! whither have leapt
from off my couch? Once more the storm is past; I see a calm.

Sister, why weepest thou, thy head wrapped in thy robe? I am ashamed
that I should make thee a partner in my sufferings and distress a
maid like thee through sickness of mine. Cease to fret for my troubles;
for though thou didst consent to it, yet 'twas I that spilt our mother's
blood. 'Tis Loxias I blame, for urging me on to do a deed most damned,
encouraging me with words but no real help; for I am sure that, had
I asked my father to his face whether I was to slay my mother, he
would have implored me oft and earnestly by this beard never to plunge
a murderer's sword into my mother's breast, since he would not thereby
regain his life, whilst I, poor wretch, should be doomed to drain
this cup of sorrow. 

E'en as it is, dear sister, unveil thy face and cease to weep, despite
our abject misery; and whensoe'er thou seest me give way to despair,
be it thine to calm and soothe the terrors and distorted fancies of
my brain; likewise when sorrow comes to thee, I must be at thy side
and give the words of comfort; for to help our friends like this is
a gracious task. 

Seek thy chamber now, poor sister; lie down and close awhile thy sleepless
eyes; take food and bathe thy body; for if thou leave me or fall sick
from nursing me, my doom is sealed; for thou art the only champion
I now have, by all the rest deserted, as thou seest. 

ELECTRA I leave thee! never! With thee I am resolved to live and
die; for 'tis the same; if thou diest, what can I, a woman, do? How
shall I escape alone, reft of brother, sire, and friends?

Still if it be thy pleasure, I must do thy bidding. But lay thee down
upon thy couch, and pay not too great heed to the terrors and alarms
that scare thee from thy rest; lie still upon thy pallet bed; for
e'en though one be not sick but only fancy it, this is a source of
weariness and perplexity to mortals.  (ELECTRA enters the palace,
as ORESTES lies back upon his couch.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Ah! ye goddesses terrific, swiftly careering on outspread pinions,
whose lot it is 'mid tears and groans to hold revel not with Bacchic
rites; ye avenging spirits swarthy-hued, that dart along the spacious
firmament, exacting a penalty for blood, a penalty for murder, to
you I make my suppliant prayer: suffer the son of Agamemnon to forget
his wild whirling frenzy! 

Ah, woe for the troublous task! which thou, poor wretch, didst strive
to compass to thy ruin, listening to the voice prophetic, proclaimed
aloud by Phoebus from the tripod throughout his sanctuary, where is
a secret spot they call "the navel of the earth." 

(antistrophe)

O Zeus! What pity will be shown? what deadly struggle is here at
hand, hurrying thee on o'er thy path of woe, a victim on whom some
fiend is heaping tribulation, by bringing on thy house thy mother's
bloodshed which drives thee raving mad? I weep for thee, for thee
I weep. 

Great prosperity abideth not amongst mankind; but some power divine,
shaking it to and fro like the sail of a swift galley, plunges it
deep in the waves of grievous affliction, boisterous and deadly as
the waves of the sea. For what new family am I henceforth to honour
by preference other than that which sprung from a marriage divine,
even from Tantalus? 

Behold a king draws near, prince Menelaus! From his magnificence 'tis
plain to see that he is a scion of the race of Tantalus.

All hail! thou that didst sail with a thousand ships to Asia's strand,
and by Heaven's help accomplish all thy heart's desire, making good-fortune
a friend to thyself.  (MENELAUS and his retinue enter.)  

MENELAUS All hail, my home! Some joy I feel on seeing thee again
on my return from Troy, some sorrow too the sight recalls; for never
yet have I beheld a house more closely encircled by the net of dire
affliction. 

Concerning Agamemnon's fate and the awful death he died at his wife's
hands I learnt as I was trying to put in at Malea, when the sailors'
seer from out the waves, unerring Glaucus, Nereus' spokesman, brought
the news to me; for he stationed himself in full view by our ship
and thus addressed me. "Yonder, Menelaus, lies thy brother slain,
plunged in a fatal bath, the last his wife will ever give him"; filling
high the cup of tears for me and my brave crew. Arrived at Nauplia,
my wife already, on the point of starting hither, I was dreaming of
folding Orestes, Agamemnon's son, and his mother in a fond embrace,
as if 'twere well with them, when I heard a mariner relate the murder
of the daughter of Tyndareus. Tell me then, good girls, where to find
the son of Agamemnon, the daring author of that fearful crime; for
he was but a babe in Clytemnestra's arms that day I left my home to
go to Troy, so that I should not recognize him, e'en were I to see
him. 

ORESTES  (staggering towards him from the couch) Behold the object
of thy inquiry, Menelaus; this is Orestes. To the will I of mine own
accord relate my sufferings. But as the prelude to my speech I clasp
thy knees in suppliant wise, seeking thus to tie to thee the prayer
of lips that lack the suppliant's bough; save me, for thou art arrived
at the very crisis of my trouble. 

MENELAUS Ye gods! what do I see? what death's-head greets my sight?

ORESTES Thou art right; I am dead through misery, though I still
gaze upon the sun. 

MENELAUS How wild the look thy unkempt hair gives thee, poor wretch!

ORESTES 'Tis not my looks, but my deeds that torture me.

MENELAUS How terribly thy tearless eyeballs glare! 

ORESTES My body is vanished and gone, though my name hath not yet
deserted me. 

MENELAUS Unsightly apparition, so different from what I expected!

ORESTES In me behold a man that hath slain his hapless mother.

MENELAUS I have heard all; be chary of thy tale of woe.

ORESTES I will; but the deity is lavish of woe to me. 

MENELAUS What ails thee? what is thy deadly sickness? 

ORESTES My conscience; I know that I am guilty of an awful crime.

MENELAUS Explain thyself; wisdom is shown in clearness, not in obscurity.

ORESTES 'Tis grief that is my chief complaint. 

MENELAUS True; she is a goddess dire; yet are there cures for her.

ORESTES Mad transports too, and the vengeance due to a mother's blood.

MENELAUS When did thy fit begin? which day was it? 

ORESTES On the day I was heaping the mound o'er my poor mother's
grave, 

MENELAUS When thou wast in the house, or watching by the pyre?

ORESTES As I was waiting by night to gather up her bones.

CHORUS What news, slave of Helen, creature from Ida? 

PHRYGIAN Ah me for Ilium, for Ilium, the city of Phrygia, and for
Ida's holy hill with fruitful soil! in foreign accents hear me raise
a plaintive strain over thee, whose ruin luckless Helen caused,-that
lovely child whom Leda bore to a feathered swan, to be a curse to
Apollo's towers of polished stone. Ah! well-a-day! woe to Dardania
for the wailings wrung from it by the steeds that bought his minion
Ganymede for Zeus. 

CHORUS Tell us plainly exactly what happened in the house, for till
now have been guessing at what I do not clearly understand.

PHRYGIAN "Ah, for Linus! woe is him!" That is what barbarians say
in their eastern tongue as a prelude to the dirge of death, whene'er
royal blood is spilt upon the ground by deadly iron blades.

To tell thee exactly what happened: there came into the palace two
lion-like men of Hellas, twins in nature; your famous chief was sire
of one, 'twas said; the other was the son of Strophius; a crafty knave
was he, like to Odysseus, subtle, silent, but staunch to his friends,
daring enough for any valiant deed, versed in war and blood-thirsty
as a serpent. Ruin seize him for his quiet plotting, the villain!

In they came, their eyes bedimmed with tears, and took their seats
in all humility near the chair of the lady whom Paris the archer once
wedded, one on this side, one on that, to right and left, with weapons
on them; and both threw their suppliant arms round the knees of Helen;
whereon her Phrygian servants started to their feet in wild alarm,
each in his terror calling to his fellow, "Beware of treachery!" To
some there seemed no cause, but others thought that the viper who
had slain his mother, was entangling the daughter of Tyndareus in
the toils of his snare. 

CHORUS And where wert thou the while? fled long before in terror?

PHRYGIAN It happened that I, in Phrygian style, was wafting the breeze
past Helen's curls with a round feather-fan, stationed before her
face; and she the while, as eastern ladies use, was twisting flax
on her distaff with her fingers, but letting her yarn fall on the
floor, for she was minded to embroider purple raiment as an offering
from the Trojan spoils, a gift for Clytemnestra at her tomb.

Then to the Spartan maid Orestes spake, "Daughter of Zeus, quit thy
chair and cross the floor to a seat at the old altar of Pelops, our
ancestor, to hear something I have to say." Therewith he led the way
and she followed, little guessing his designs. Meantime his accomplice,
the Phocian miscreant, was off on other business. "Out of my way!
Well, Phrygians always were cowards." So he shut them up in different
parts of the house, some in the stables, others in private chambers,
one here, one there, disposing of them severally at a distance from
their mistress. 

CHORUS What happened next? 

PHRYGIAN Mother of Ida, mighty parent! Oh! the murderous scenes and
lawless wickedness that I witnessed in the royal palace! They drew
forth swords from under their purple cloaks, each darting his eye
all round him in either direction to see that none was near, and then,
like boars that range the hills, they stood at bay before her, crying,
"Thou must die; it is thy craven husband that will slay thee, because
he betrayed his brother's son to death in Argos." But she with piercing
screams brought down her snow-white arm upon her bosom and loudly
smote on her poor head; then turned her steps in flight, shod in her
golden shoon; but Orestes, outstripping her slippered feet, clutched
his fingers in her hair and bending back her neck on to her left shoulder
was on the point of driving the grim steel into her throat.

CHORUS Where were those Phrygians in the house to help her then?

PHRYGIAN With a loud cry we battered down the doors and doorposts
of the rooms we had been penned in, by means of bars, and ran to her
assistance from every direction, one arming himself with stones, another
with javelins, a third having a drawn sword; but Pylades came to meet
us, all undaunted, like Hector of Troy or Ajax triple-plumed, as I
saw him on the threshold of Priam's palace; and we met point to point.
But then it became most manifest how inferior we Phrygians were to
the warriors of Hellas in martial prowess. There was one man flying,
another slain, a third wounded, yet another craving mercy to stave
off death; but we escaped under cover of the darkness: while some
were falling, others staggering, and some laid low in death. And just
as her unhappy mother sunk to the ground to die, came luckless Hermione
to the palace; whereon those twain, like Bacchanals when they drop
their wands and seize a mountain-cub, rushed and seized her; then
turned again to the daughter of Zeus to slay her; but lo! she had
vanished from the room, passing right through the house by magic spells
or wizards'arts or heavenly fraud; O Zeus and earth, O day and night!

What happened afterwards I know not, for I stole out of the palace
and ran away. So Menelaus went through all his toil and trouble to
recover his wife Helen from Troy to no purpose.  (ORESTES comes out
of the palace.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Behold another strange sight succeeding its
predecessors; I see Orestes sword in hand before the palace, advancing
with excited steps. 

ORESTES Where is he who fled from the palace to escape my sword?

PHRYGIAN  (falling at the feet Of ORESTES) Before thee I prostrate
myself, O prince, and do obeisance in my foreign way. 

ORESTES 'Tis not Ilium that is now the scene, but the land of Argos.

PHRYGIAN No matter where, the wise love life more than death.

ORESTES I suppose that shouting of thine was not for Menelaus to
come to the rescue? 

PHRYGIAN Oh no! it was to help thee I called out, for thou art more
deserving. 

ORESTES Was it a just fate that overtook the daughter of Tyndareus?

PHRYGIAN Most just, though she had had throats to die with.

ORESTES Thy cowardice makes thee glib; these are not thy real sentiments.

PHRYGIAN Why, surely she deserved it for the havoc she made of Hellas
as well as Troy? 

ORESTES Swear thou art not saying this to humour me, or I will slay
thee. 

PHRYGIAN By my life I swear,-an oath likely to be true in my case.

ORESTES Did every Phrygian in Troy show the same terror of steel
as thou dost? 

PHRYGIAN Oh, take thy sword away! held so near it throws a horrid
gleam of blood. 

ORESTES Art thou afraid of being turned to a stone, as if it were
a Gorgon thou seest? 

PHRYGIAN To a stone, no! but to a corpse; that Gorgon's head is not
within my ken. 

ORESTES A slave, and so fearful of death, which will release thee
from trouble! 

PHRYGIAN Bond or free, every one is glad to gaze upon the light.

ORESTES Well said! thy shrewdness saves thee; go within.

PHRYGIAN Thou wilt not kill me after all? 

ORESTES Thou art spared! 

PHRYGIAN O gracious words! 

ORESTES Come, I shall change my mind- 

PHRYGIAN Ill-omened utterance! 

ORESTES Thou fool dost think I could endure to plunge my sword in
throat of thine, thou that neither art woman nor amongst men hast
any place? The reason I left the palace was to gag thy noisy tongue;
for Argos is quickly roused, once it hears a cry to the rescue. As
for Menelaus, we are not afraid of measuring swords with him; no!
he may go upon his way proud of the golden ringlets on his shoulders;
for if, to avenge the slaying of Helen, he gathers the Argives and
leads them against the palace, refusing to attempt the rescue of me,
my sister, and Pylades my fellow-conspirator, he shall have two corpses
to behold, his daughter's as well as his wife's.  (The PHRYGIAN departs
as ORESTES re-enters the palace.)  

CHORUS  (singing) Ah! fortune, fortune! again and yet again the house
is entering on a fearful contest for the race of Atreus.

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS  (chanting) What are we to do? carry tidings to
the town, or hold our peace? 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS  (chanting) It is safer to keep silence, friends.

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS  (chanting) Look, look at that sudden rush of smoke
to the sky in front of the palace, telling its tale in advance!

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS  (chanting) They are kindling torches to fire
the halls of Tantalus; they do not shrink even from murder.

CHORUS  (singing) God holds the issue in his hand, to give to mortal
men what end he will. Some mighty power is his; it was through a vengeful
fiend that this family started on its career of murder, by hurling
Myrtilus from the chariot. 

But lo! I see Menelaus approaching the palace in hot haste; no doubt
he has heard what is happening here. What ho! within, descendants
of Atreus, make haste and secure the doors with bars. A man in luck
is a dangerous adversary for luckless wretches like thyself, Orestes.
(ORESTES and PYLADES appear on the roof, holding HERMIONE. MENELAUS
and his attendants enter.)  

MENELAUS Strange news of violent deeds done by a pair of savages,-men
I do not call them,-has brought me hither. What I heard was that my
wife was not killed after all, but had vanished out of sight,-an idle
rumour doubtless, brought to me by some dupe of his own terror; a
ruse perhaps of the matricide to turn the laugh against me.

Throw wide the palace doors! My orders to my servants are that they
force the doors, that I may rescue my child at any rate from the hands
of the murderers and recover my poor wife's corpse, that dear partner
whose slayers must die with her by my arm. 

ORESTES  (from the roof) Ho, fellow! Keep thy fingers off those bolts,
thou Menelaus, who vauntest thyself so high; else will I tear off
the ancient parapet, the work of masons, and shatter thy skull with
this coping-stone. The doors are bolted and barred, which will prevent
thy entrance to the palace and thy eagerness to bring aid.

MENELAUS Ha! what now? I see a blaze of torches and men standing
at bay on the house-top yonder, with a sword held at my daughter's
throat. 

ORESTES Wouldst question me or hear me speak? 

MENELAUS Neither; but I suppose I must hear thee. 

ORESTES Well, if thou art anxious to know, I intend to slay thy daughter.

MENELAUS After slaying Helen, art thou bent on adding another murder?

ORESTES I would I had compassed that, instead of being duped by the
gods! 

MENELAUS Dost thou deny having slain her, saying this out of wanton
insult? 

ORESTES Yes, I do deny it to my sorrow. Would God- 

MENELAUS Would God-what? Thou provokest my fears. 

ORESTES I had hurled to Hades the pollution of Hellas! 

MENELAUS Surrender my wife's dead body, that I may bury her.

ORESTES Ask the gods for her; but thy daughter I will slay.

MENELAUS This matricide is bent on adding murder to murder.

ORESTES This champion of his sire, betrayed by thee to death.

MENELAUS Art thou not content with the stain of the mother's blood
which is on thee? 

ORESTES I should not grow tired if I had these wicked women to slay
for ever. 

MENELAUS Art thou too, Pylades, a partner in this bloody work?

ORESTES His silence says he is; so my saying it will suffice.

MENELAUS Not without thy ruing it, unless thou take wings and fly.

ORESTES Fly we never will, but will fire the palace. 

MENELAUS What! wilt thou destroy the home of thy ancestors?

ORESTES To prevent thee getting it I will, offering this maid in
sacrifice upon its flames. 

MENELAUS Kill her, for thou wilt be punished by me for such a murder.

ORESTES Agreed. 

MENELAUS No, no! refrain! 

ORESTES Silence! thy sufferings are just; endure them. 

MENELAUS Pray, is it just that thou shouldst live? 

ORESTES And rule a kingdom, yes. 

MENELAUS A kingdom-where? 

ORESTES Here in Pelasgian Argos. 

MENELAUS Thou art so well qualified to handle sacred water!

ORESTES And, pray, why not? 

MENELAUS And to slay victims before battle! 

ORESTES Well, art thou? 

MENELAUS Yes, my hands are clean. 

ORESTES But not thy heart. 

MENELAUS Who would speak to thee? 

ORESTES Every man that loves his father. 

MENELAUS And the man who honours his mother? 

ORESTES He's a happy man. 

MENELAUS Thou didst not honour thine, at any rate. 

ORESTES No, for I delight not in your wicked women. 

MENELAUS Remove that sword from my daughter's throat. 

ORESTES Thou art wrong. 

MENELAUS What! wilt slay her? 

ORESTES Right once more. 

MENELAUS Ah me! what can I do? 

ORESTES Go to the Argives and persuade them- 

MENELAUS To what? 

ORESTES Entreat the city that we may not die. 

MENELAUS Otherwise, will ye slay my child? 

ORESTES That is the alternative. 

MENELAUS Alas for thee, Helen! 

ORESTES And is it not "alas!" for me? 

MENELAUS I brought her back from Troy only for thee to butcher.

ORESTES Would I had! 

MENELAUS After troubles innumerable. 

ORESTES Except where I was concerned. 

MENELAUS Dread treatment mine! 

ORESTES The reason being thy refusal to help me then? 

MENELAUS Thou hast me. 

ORESTES Thy own cowardice has.  (Calling from the roof to ELECTRA)
Ho there! fire the palace from beneath, Electra; and, Pylades, my
trusty friend, kindle the parapet of yonder walls.  (The palace is
seen to be ablaze.)  

MENELAUS Help, help, ye Danai! gird on your harness and come, ye
dwellers in knightly Argos! for here is a fellow trying to wrest his
life from your whole city, though he has caused pollution by shedding
his mother's blood.  (APOLLO appears from above with HELEN.)

APOLLO Menelaus, calm thy excited mood; I am Phoebus, the son of
Latona, who draw nigh to call thee by name, and thou no less, Orestes,
who, sword in hand, art keeping guard on yonder maid, that thou mayst
hear what have come to say. Helen, whom all thy eagerness failed to
destroy, when thou wert seeking to anger Menelaus, is here as ye see
in the enfolding air, rescued from death instead of slain by thee.
'Twas I that saved her and snatched her from beneath thy sword at
the bidding of her father Zeus; for she his child must put on immortality,
and take her place with Castor and Polydeuces in the bosom of the
sky, a saviour to mariners. Choose thee then another bride and take
her to thy home, for the gods by means of Helen's loveliness embroiled
Troy and Hellas, causing death thereby, that they might lighten mother
Earth of the outrage done her by the increase of man's number. Such
is Helen's end. 

But as for thee, Orestes, thou must cross the frontier of this land
and dwell for one whole year on Parrhasian soil, which from thy flight
thither shall be called the land of Orestes by Azanians and Arcadians;
and when thou returnest thence to the city of Athens, submit to be
brought to trial by "the Avenging Three" for thy mother's murder,
for the gods will be umpires between you and will pass a most righteous
sentence on thee upon the hill of Ares, where thou art to win thy
case. Likewise, it is ordained, Orestes, that thou shalt wed Hermione,
at whose neck thou art pointing thy sword; Neoptolemus shall never
marry her, though he thinks he will; for his death is fated to o'ertake
him by a Delphian sword, when he claims satisfaction of me for the
death of his father Achilles. Bestow thy sister's hand on Pylades,
to whom thou didst formerly promise her; the life awaiting him henceforth
is one of bliss. 

Menelaus, leave Orestes to rule Argos; go thou and reign oer Sparta,
keeping it as the dowry of a wife, who till this day ne'er ceased
exposing thee to toils innumerable. Between Orestes and the citizens,
I, who forced his mother's murder on him, will bring about a reconciliation.

ORESTES Hail to thee, prophetic Loxias, for these thy utterances!
Thou art not a lying prophet after all, but a true seer; and yet there
came a dreadful thought into my heart that it was some fiend I had
listened to, when seemed to hear thy voice; but all is ending well,
and I obey thy word. There! I release Hermione from a violent death
and agree to make her my wife whenever her father gives consent.

MENELAUS All hail, Helen, daughter of Zeus! I wish thee joy of thy
home in heaven's happy courts. To thee, Orestes, I betroth my daughter
according to the word of Phoebus, and good luck attend thee, a noble
wooer nobly wived, and me the parent of thy bride! 

APOLLO Repair each one to the place appointed by me; reconcile all
strife. 

MENELAUS Obedience is a duty. 

ORESTES I think thus also, Menelaus; so here I make a truce with
sorrow and with thy oracles, O Loxias. 

APOLLO  (chanting) Go your ways, and honour Peace, most fair of goddesses;
I, meantime, will escort Helen to the mansions of Zeus, soon as I
reach the star-lit firmament. There, seated side by side with Hera
and Hebe, the bride of Heracles, she shall be honoured by men with
drink-offerings as a goddess for ever, sharing with those Zeus-born
sons of Tyndareus their empire o'er the sea, for the good of mariners.
(APOLLO and HELEN vanish.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) Hail! majestic Victory, still in thy keeping hold
my life and ne'er withhold the crown! 

THEEND
 Before the royal palace of Thebes. JOCASTA enters from the palace
alone.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

JOCASTA O sun-god, who cleavest thy way along the starry sky, mounted
on golden-studded car, rolling on thy path of flame behind fleet coursers,
how curst the beam thou didst shed on Thebes, the day that Cadmus
left Phoenicia's realm beside the sea and reached this land! He it
was that in days long gone wedded Harmonia, the daughter of Cypris,
and begat Polydorus from whom they say sprung Labdacus, and Laius
from him. I am known as the daughter of Menoeceus, and Creon is my
brother by the same mother. Men called me Jocasta, for so my father
named me, and I am married to Laius. Now when he was still childless
after being wedded to me a long time, he went and questioned Phoebus,
craving moreover that our love might be crowned with sons born to
his house. But the god said, "King of Thebes for horses famed! seek
not to beget children against the will of heaven; for if thou beget
a son, that child shall slay thee, and all thy house shall wade through
blood." But he, yielding to his lust in a drunken fit, begat a son
of me, and when his babe was born, conscious of his sin and of the
god's warning, he gave the child to shepherds to expose in Hera's
meadow on mount Cithaeron, after piercing his ankles with iron spikes;
whence it was that Hellas named him Oedipus. But the keepers of the
horses of Polybus finding him took him home and laid him in the arms
of their mistress. So she suckled the child that I had borne and persuaded
her husband she was its mother. Soon as my son was grown to man's
estate, the tawny beard upon his cheek, either because he had guessed
the fraud or learnt it from another, he set out for the shrine of
Phoebus, eager to know for certain who his parents were; and likewise
Laius, my husband, was on his way thither, anxious to find out if
the child he had exposed was dead. And they twain met where the branching
roads to Phocis unite; and the charioteer of Laius called to him,
"Out of the way, stranger, room for my lord!" But he, with never a
word, strode on in his pride; and the horses with their hoofs drew
blood from the tendons of his feet. Then-but why need I tell aught
beyond the sad issue?-son slew father, and taking his chariot gave
it to Polybus his foster-father. Now when the Sphinx was grievously
harrying our city after my husband's death, my brother Creon proclaimed
that he would wed me to any who should guess the riddle of that crafty
maiden. By some strange chance, my own son, Oedipus, guessed the Sphinx's
riddle, and so he became king of this land and received its sceptre
as his prize, and married his mother, all unwitting, luckless wretch!
nor did I his mother know that I was wedded to my son; and I bore
him two sons, Eteocles and the hero Polyneices, and two daughters
as well; the one her father called Ismene, the other, which was the
elder, I named Antigone. Now when Oedipus, that awful sufferer, learnt
that I his wedded wife was his mother too, he inflicted a ghastly
outrage upon his eyes, tearing the bleeding orbs with a golden brooch.
But since my sons have grown to bearded men, they have confined their
father closely, that his misfortune, needing as it did full many a
shift to hide it, might be forgotten. He is still living in the palace,
but his misfortunes have so unhinged him that he imprecates the most
unholy curses on his sons, praying that they may have to draw the
sword before they share this house between them. So they, fearful
that heaven may accomplish his prayer if they dwell together, have
made an agreement, arranging that Polyneices, the younger, should
first leave the land in voluntary exile, while Eteocles should stay
and hold the sceptre for a year and then change places. But as soon
as Eteocles was seated high in power, he refused to give up the throne,
and drove Polyneices into exile from the kingdom; so Polyneices went
to Argos and married into the family of Adrastus, and having collected
a numerous force of Argives is leading them hither; and he is come
up against our seven-gated walls, demanding the sceptre of his father
and his share in the kingdom. Wherefore I, to end their strife, have
prevailed on one son to meet the other under truce, before appealing
to arms; and the messenger I sent tells me that he will come. O Zeus,
whose home is heaven's radiant vault, save us, and grant that my sons
may be reconciled! For thou, if thou art really wise, must not suffer
the same poor mortal to be for ever wretched.  (JOCASTA re-enters
the palace, as the OLD SERVANT appears on the roof.)  

OLD SERVANT Antigone, choice blossom in a father's house, although
thy mother allowed thee at thy earnest treaty to leave thy maiden
chamber for the topmost story of the house, thence to behold the Argive
host, yet a stay moment that I may first reconnoitre the path, whether
there be any of the citizens visible on the road, lest reproach, little
as it matters to a slave like me, fasten on thee, my royal mistress;
and when I am quite sure will tell thee everything that I saw and
heard from the Argives, when carried the terms of the truce to and
fro between this city and Polyneices.  (After a slight pause)  No,
there is no citizen approaching the palace; so mount the ancient cedar
steps, and view the plains that skirt Ismenus and the fount of Dirce
to see the mighty host of foemen.  (ANTIGONE appears beside him. She
chants her replies to him.)  

ANTIGONE Stretch out thy hand to me from the stairs, the hand of
age to youth, helping me to mount. 

OLD SERVANT There! clasp it, my young mistress; thou art come at
a lucky moment; for Pelasgia's host is just upon the move, and their
several contingents are separating. 

ANTIGONE O Hecate, dread child of Latona! the plain is one blaze
of bronze. 

OLD SERVANT Ah! this is no ordinary home-coming of Polyneices; with
many a knight and clash of countless arms he comes. 

ANTIGONE Are the gates fast barred, and the brazen bolts shot home
into Amphion's walls of stone? 

OLD SERVANT Never fear! all is safe within the town. But mark him
who cometh first, if thou wouldst learn his name. 

ANTIGONE Who is that with the white crest, who marches in the van,
lightly bearing on his arm a buckler all of bronze? 

OLD SERVANT A chieftain, lady- 

ANTIGONE Who is he? whose son? his name? tell me, old man.

OLD SERVANT Mycenae claims him for her son; in Lerna's glens he dwells,
the prince Hippomedon. 

ANTIGONE Ah! how proud and terrible his mien! like to an earth-born
giant he moves, with stars engraved upon his targe, resembling not
a child of earth. 

OLD SERVANT Dost see yon chieftain crossing Dirce's stream?

ANTIGONE His harness is quite different. Who is that? 

OLD SERVANT Tydeus, the son of Oeneus; true Aetolian spirit fires
his breast. 

ANTIGONE Is this he, old man, who wedded a sister of the wife of
Polyneices? What a foreign look his armour has! a half-barbarian he!

OLD SERVANT Yes, my child; all Aetolians carry shields, and are most
unerring marksmen with their darts. 

ANTIGONE How art thou so sure of these descriptions, old man?

OLD SERVANT I carefully noted the blazons on their shields before
when I went with the terms of the truce to thy brother; so when I
see them now I know who carry them. 

ANTIGONE Who is that youth passing close to the tomb of Zethus, with
long flowing hair, but a look of fury in his eye? is he a captain?
for crowds of warriors follow at his heels. 

OLD SERVANT That is Parthenopaeus, Atalanta's son. 

ANTIGONE May Artemis, who hies o'er the hills with his mother, lay
him low with an arrow, for coming against my city to sack it!

OLD SERVANT May it be so, my daughter; but with justice are they
come hither, and my fear is that the gods will take the rightful view,

ANTIGONE Where is he who was born of the same mother as I was by
a cruel destiny? Oh! tell me, old friend, where Polyneices is.

OLD SERVANT He is yonder, ranged next to Adrastus near the tomb of
Niobe's seven unwed daughters. Dost see him? 

ANTIGONE I see him, yes! but not distinctly; 'tis but the outline
of his form the semblance of his stalwart limbs I see. Would I could
speed through the sky, swift as a cloud before the wind, towards my
own dear brother, and throw my arms about my darling's neck, so long,
poor boy! an exile. How bright his golden weapons flash like the sun-god's
morning rays! 

OLD SERVANT He will soon be here, to fill thy heart with joy, according
to the truce. 

ANTIGONE Who is that, old man, on yonder car driving snow-white steeds?

OLD SERVANT That, lady, is the prophet Amphiaraus; with him are the
victims, whose streaming blood the thirsty earth will drink.

ANTIGONE Daughter of Latona with the dazzling zone, O moon, thou
orb of golden light! how quietly, with what restraint he drives, goading
first one horse, then the other! But where is Capaneus who utters
those dreadful threats against this city? 

OLD SERVANT Yonder he is, calculating how he may scale the towers,
taking the measure of our walls from base to summit. 

ANTIGONE O Nemesis, with booming thunder-peals of Zeus and blazing
levin-light, thine it is to silence such presumptuous boasting. Is
this the man, who says he will give the maids of Thebes as captives
of his spear to Mycenae's dames, to Lerna's Trident, and the waters
of Amymone, dear to Poseidon, when he has thrown the toils of slavery
round them? Never, never, Artemis, my queen revered, child of Zeus
with locks of gold, may I endure the yoke of slavery! 

OLD SERVANT My daughter, go within, and abide beneath the shelter
of thy maiden chamber, now that thou hast had thy wish and seen all
that thy heart desired; for I see a crowd of women moving toward the
royal palace, confusion reigning in the city. Now the race of women
by nature loves to find fault; and if they get some slight handle
for their talk they exaggerate it, for they seem to take a pleasure
in saying everything bad of one another.  (ANTIGONE and the OLD SERVANT
descend into the palace, as the CHORUS of PHOENICIAN MAIDENS enters.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe 1)

From the Tyrian main I come, an offering choice for Loxias from Phoenician
isle, to minister to Phoebus in his halls, where his fane lies nestling
'neath the snow-swept peaks of Parnassus; over the Ionian sea I rowed
my course, for above the plains unharvested, that fringe the coast
of Sicily, the boisterous west-wind coursed, piping sweetest music
in the sky. 

(antistrophe 1)

Chosen from my city as beauty's gift for Loxias, to the land of Cadmus
I came, sent thither to the towers of Laius, the home of my kin, the
famous sons of Agenor; and there I became the handmaid of Phoebus,
dedicated like his offerings of wrought gold. But as yet the water
of Castaly is waiting for me to bedew the maiden glory of my tresses
for the service of Phoebus. 

(epode)

Hail! thou rock that kindlest bright fire above the twin-peaked heights
of Dionysus. Hail! thou vine, that, day by day, makest the lush bunches
of thy grapes to drip. Hail! awful cavern of the serpent, and the
god's outlook on the hills, and sacred mount by snow-storms lashed!
would I were now circling in the dance of the deathless god, free
from wild alarms, having left Dirce ere this for the vales of Phoebus
at the centre of the world! 

(strophe 2)

But now I find the impetuous god of war is come to battle before
these walls, and hath kindled murder's torch in this city. God grant
he fail! for a friend's sorrows are also mine; and if this land with
its seven towers suffer any mischance, Phoenicia's realm must share
it. Ah me! our stock is one; all children we of Io, that horned maid,
whose sorrows I partake. 

(antistrophe 2)

Around the city a dense array of serried shields is rousing the spectre
of bloody strife, whose issue Ares shall soon learn to his cost, if
he brings upon the sons of Oedipus the horrors of the curse. O Argos,
city of Pelasgia! I dread thy prowess and the vengeance Heaven sends;
for he who cometh against our home in full panoply is entering the
lists with justice on his side.  (POLYNEICES enters alone.)

POLYNEICES Those who kept watch and ward at the gate admitted me
so readily within the walls that my only fear is, that now they have
caught me in their toils, they will not let me out unscathed; so I
must turn my eye in every direction, hither and thither, to guard
against all treachery. Armed with this sword, I shall inspire myself
with the trust that is born of boldness.  (Starting)  What ho! who
goes there? or is it an idle sound I fear? Everything seems a danger
to venturous spirits, when their feet begin to tread an enemy's country.
Still I trust my mother, and at the same time mistrust her for persuading
me to come hither under truce. Well, there is help at hand, for the
altar's hearth is close and there are people in the palace. Come,
let me sheath my sword in its dark scabbard and ask these maidens
standing near the house, who they are. 

Ladies of another land, tell me from what country ye come to the halls
of Hellas. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Phoenicia is my native land where I was born
and bred; and Agenor's children's children sent me hither as a first-fruits
of the spoils of war foy Phoebus; but when the noble son of Oedipus
was about to escort me to the hallowed oracle and the altars of Loxias,
came Argives meantime against his city. Now tell me in return who
thou art that comes to this fortress of the Theban realm with its
seven gates. 

POLYNEICES My father was Oedipus, the son of Laius; my mother Jocasta,
daughter of Menoeceus; and I am called Polyneices by the folk of Thebes.

CHORUS  (chanting) O kinsman of Agenor's race, my royal masters who
sent me hither at thy feet, prince, I throw myself, according to the
custom of my home. At last art thou come to thy native land; at last!
Hail to thee! all hail! Come forth, my honoured mistress, open wide
the doors. Dost hear, O mother of this chief? Why art thou delaying
to leave the sheltering roof to fold thy son in thy embrace?  (JOCASTA
enters from the palace.)  

JOCASTA  (chanting) Maidens, I hear you call in your Phoenician tongue,
and my old feet drag their tottering steps to meet my son. O my son,
my son, at last after many a long day I see thee face to face; throw
thy arms about thy mother's bosom; reach hither thy cheek to me and
thy dark locks of clustering hair, o'ershadowing my neck therewith.
Hail to thee! all hail! scarce now restored to thy mother's arms,
when hope and expectation both were dead. What can I say to thee?
how recall in every way, by word, by deed, the bliss of days long
past, expressing my joy in the mazy measures of the dance? Ah! my
son, thou didst leave thy father's halls desolate, when thy brother's
despite drove thee thence in exile. Truly thou wert missed alike by
thy friends and Thebes. This was why I cut off my silvered locks and
let them fall for grief with many a tear, not clad in robes of white,
my son, but instead thereof taking for my wear these sorry sable tatters;
while within the palace that aged one with sightless orbs, ever nursing
the sorrow of a double regret for the pair of brethren estranged from
their home, rushed to lay hands upon himself with the sword or by
the noose suspended o'er his chamber-roof, moaning his curses on his
sons; and now he buries himself in darkness, weeping ever and lamenting.
And thou, my child,-I hear thou hast taken an alien to wife and art
begetting children to thy joy in thy home; they tell me thou art courting
a foreign alliance, a ceaseless woe to me thy mother and to Laius
thy ancestor, to have this woeful marriage foisted on us. 'Twas no
hand of mine that lit for thee the marriage-torch, as custom ordains
and as a happy mother ought; no part had Ismenus at thy wedding in
supplying the luxurious bath; and there was silence through the streets
of Thebes, what time thy young bride entered her home. Curses on them!
whether it be the sword or strife or thy sire that is to blame, or
heaven's visitation that hath burst so riotously upon the house of
Oedipus; for on me is come all the anguish of these troubles.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Wondrous dear to woman is the child of her travail,
and all her race hath some affection for its babes. 

POLYNEICES Mother, I have come amongst enemies wisely or foolishly;
but all men needs must love their native land; whoso saith otherwise
is pleased to say so but his thoughts are turned elsewhere. So fearful
was I and in such terror, lest my brother might slay me by treachery
that I made my way through the city sword in hand, casting my eyes
all round me. My only hope is the truce and thy plighted word which
induced me to enter my paternal walls; and many a tear I shed by the
way, seeing after a weary while my home and the altars of the gods,
the training ground, scene of my childhood, and Dirce's founts from
which I was unjustly driven to sojourn in a strange city, with tears
ever gushing from mine eyes. Yea, and to add to my grief I see thee
with hair cut short and clad in sable robe; woe is me for my sorrows!

How terrible, dear mother, is hatred 'twixt those once near and dear;
how hard it makes all reconciliation! What doth my aged sire within
the house, his light all darkness now? what of my sisters twain? Ah!
they, I know, bewail my bitter exile. 

JOCASTA Some god with fell intent is plaguing the race of Oedipus.
Thus it all began; I broke God's law and bore a son, and in an evil
hour married thy father and thou wert born. But why repeat these horrors?
what Heaven sends we have to bear. I am afraid to ask thee what I
fain would, for fear of wounding thy feelings; yet I long to.

POLYNEICES Nay, question me, leave naught unsaid; for thy will, mother,
is my pleasure too. 

JOCASTA Well then, first I ask thee what I long to have answered.
What means exile from one's country? is it a great evil?

POLYNEICES The greatest; harder to bear than tell. 

JOCASTA What is it like? what is it galls the exile? 

POLYNEICES One thing most of all; he cannot speak his mind.

JOCASTA This is a slave's lot thou describest, to refrain from uttering
what one thinks. 

POLYNEICES The follies of his rulers must be bear. 

JOCASTA That too is bitter, to join in the folly of fools.

POLYNEICES Yet to gain our ends we must submit against our nature.

JOCASTA Hope, they say, is the exile's food. 

POLYNEICES Aye, hope that looks so fair; but she is ever in the future.

JOCASTA But doth not time expose her futility? 

POLYNEICES She hath a certain winsome charm in misfortune.

JOCASTA Whence hadst thou means to live, ere thy marriage found it
for thee? 

POLYNEICES One while I had enough for the day, and then maybe I had
it not. 

JOCASTA Did not thy father's friends and whilom guests assist thee?

POLYNEICES Seek to be prosperous; once let fortune lour, and the
aid supplied by friends is naught. 

JOCASTA Did not thy noble breeding exalt thy horn for thee?

POLYNEICES Poverty is a curse; breeding would not find me food.

JOCASTA Man's dearest treasure then, it seems, is his country.

POLYNEICES No words of thine could tell how dear. 

JOCASTA How was it thou didst go to Argos? what was thy scheme?

POLYNEICES I know not; the deity summoned me thither in accordance
with my destiny. 

JOCASTA He doubtless had some wise design; but how didst thou win
thy wife? 

POLYNEICES Loxias had given Adrastus an oracle. 

JOCASTA What was it? what meanest thou? I cannot guess.

POLYNEICES That he should wed his daughters to a boar and a lion.

JOCASTA What hadst thou, my son, to do with the name of beasts?

POLYNEICES It was night when I reached the porch of Adrastus.

JOCASTA In search of a resting-place, or wandering thither in thy
exile? 

POLYNEICES Yes, I wandered thither; and so did another like me.

JOCASTA Who was he? he too it seems was in evil plight.

POLYNEICES Tydeus, son of Oeneus, was his name. 

JOCASTA But why did Adrastus liken you to wild beasts? 

POLYNEICES Because we came to blows about our bed. 

JOCASTA Was it then that the son of Talaus understood the oracle?

POLYNEICES Yes, and he gave to us his daughters twain. 

JOCASTA Art thou blest or curst in thy marriage? 

POLYNEICES As yet I have no fault to find with it. 

JOCASTA How didst thou persuade an army to follow thee hither?

POLYNEICES To me and to Tydeus who is my kinsman by marriage, Adrastus
sware an oath, even to the husbands of his daughters twain, that he
would restore us both to our country, but me the first. So many a
chief from Argos and Mycenae has joined me, doing me a bitter though
needful service, for 'tis against my own city I am marching. Now I
call heaven to witness, that it is not willingly I have raised my
arm against parents whom I love full well. But to thee, mother, it
belongs to dissolve this unhappy feud, and, by reconciling brothers
in love, to end my troubles and thine and this whole city's. 'Tis
an old-world maxim, but I will cite it for all that: "Men set most
store by wealth, and of all things in this world it hath the greatest
power." This am I come to secure at the head of my countless host;
for good birth is naught if poverty go with it. 

LEADER Lo! Eteocles comes hither to discuss the truce. Thine the
task, mother Jocasta, to speak such words as may reconcile thy sons.
(ETEOCLES and his retinue enter.)  

ETEOCLES Mother, I am here; but it was only to pleasure thee I came.
What am to do? Let some one begin the conference; for I stopped marshalling
the citizens in double lines around the walls, that I might hear thy
arbitration. between us; for it is under this truce that thou hast
persuaded me to admit this fellow within the walls. 

JOCASTA Stay a moment; haste never carries justice with it; but slow
deliberation oft attains a wise result. Restrain the fierceness of
thy look, that panting rage; for this is not the Gorgon's severed
head but thy own brother whom thou seest here. Thou too, Polyneices,
turn and face thy brother; for if thou and he stand face to face,
thou wilt adopt a kindlier tone and lend a readier ear to him. I fain
would give you both one piece of wholesome counsel; when a man that
is angered with his friend confronts him face to face, he ought only
to keep in view the object of his coming, forgetting all previous
quarrels. Polyneices my son, speak first, for thou art come at the
head of a Danaid host, alleging wrongful treatment; and may some god
judge betwixt us and reconcile the trouble. 

POLYNEICES The words of truth are simple, and justice needs no subtle
interpretations, for it hath a fitness in itself; but the words of
injustice, being rotten in themselves, require clever treatment. I
provided for his interests and mine in our father's palace, being
anxious to avoid the curse which Oedipus once uttered against us;
of my own free-will I left the land, allowing him to rule our country
for one full year, on condition that I should then take the sceptre
in turn, instead of plunging into deadly enmity and thereby doing
others hurt or suffering it myself, as is now the case. But he, after
consenting to this and calling the gods to witness his oath, has performed
none of his promises, but is still keeping the sovereignty in his
own hands together with my share of our heritage. Even now am I ready
to take my own and dismiss my army from this land, receiving my house
in turn to dwell therein, and once more restore it to him for a like
period instead of ravaging our country and planting scaling-ladders
against the towers, as I shall attempt to do if I do not get my rights.
Wherefore I call the gods to witness that spite of my just dealing
in everything I am being unjustly robbed of my country by most godless
fraud. Here, mother, have I stated the several points on their own
merits, without collecting words to fence them in, but urging a fair
case, I think, alike in the judgment of skilled or simple folk.

LEADER To me at least, albeit I was not born and bred in Hellas,
thy words seem full of sense. 

ETEOCLES If all were at one in their ideas of honour and wisdom,
there would have been no strife to make men disagree; but, as it is,
fairness and equality have no existence in this world beyond the name;
there is really no such thing. For instance, mother, I will tell thee
this without any concealment; I would ascend to the rising of the
stars and the sun or dive beneath the earth, were I able so to do,
to win a monarch's power, the chief of things divine. Therefore, mother,
I will never yield this blessing to another, but keep it for myself;
for it were a coward's act to lose the greater and to win the less.
Besides, I blush to think that he should gain his object by coming
with arms in his hand and ravaging the land; for this were foul disgrace
to glorious Thebes, if I should yield my sceptre up to him for fear
of Argive might. He ought not, mother, to have attempted reconcilement
by armed force, for words compass everything that even the sword of
an enemy might effect. Still, if on any other terms he cares to dwell
here, he may; but the sceptre will I never willingly let go. Shall
I become his slave, when I can be his master? Never! Wherefore come
fire, come sword! harness your steeds, fill the plains with chariots,
for I will not forego my throne for him. For if we must do wrong,
to do so for a kingdom were the fairest cause, but in all else virtue
should be our aim. 

LEADER Fair words are only called for when the deeds they crown are
fair; otherwise they lose their charm and offend justice.

JOCASTA Eteocles, my child, it is not all evil that attends old age;
sometimes its experience can offer sager counsel than can youth. Oh
why, my son, art thou so set upon Ambition, that worst of deities?
Forbear; that goddess knows not justice; many are the homes and cities
once prosperous that she hath entered and left after the ruin of her
votaries; she it is thou madly followest. Better far, my son, prize
Equality that ever linketh friend to friend, city to city, and allies
to each other; for Equality is man's natural law; but the less is
always in opposition to the greater, ushering in the dayspring of
dislike. For it is Equality that hath set up for man measures and
divisions of weights and hath distinguished numbers; night's sightless
orb, and radiant sun proceed upon their yearly course on equal terms,
and neither of them is envious when it has to yield. Though sun and
gloom then both are servants in man's interests, wilt not thou be
content with thy fair share of thy heritage and give the same to him?
if not, why where is justice? Why prize beyond its worth the monarch's
power, injustice in prosperity? why think so much of the admiring
glances turned on rank? Nay, 'tis vanity. Or wouldst thou by heaping
riches in thy halls, heap up toil therewith? what advantage is it?
'tis but a name; for the wise find that enough which suffices for
their wants. Man indeed hath no possessions of his own; we do but
hold a stewardship of the gods' property; and when they will, they
take it back again. Riches make no settled home, but are as transient
as the day. Come, suppose I put before thee two alternatives, whether
thou wilt rule or save thy city? Wilt thou say "Rule"? 

Again, if Polyneices win the day and his Argive warriors rout the
ranks of Thebes, thou wilt see this city conquered and many a captive
maid brutally dishonoured by the foe; so will that wealth thou art
so bent on getting become a grievous bane to Thebes; but still ambition
fills thee. This I say to thee; and this to thee, Polyneices; Adrastus
hath conferred a foolish favour on thee; and thou too hast shown little
sense in coming to lay thy city waste. Suppose thou conquer this land
(which Heaven forefend!) tell me, I conjure thee, how wilt thou rear
a trophy to Zeus? how wilt thou begin the sacrifice after thy country's
conquest or inscribe the spoils at the streams of Inachus with "Polyneices
gave Thebes to the flames and dedicated these shields to the gods"?
Oh! never, my son, be it thine to win such fame from Hellas! If, on
the other hand, thou art worsted and thy brother's cause prevail,
how shalt thou return to Argos, leaving countless dead behind? Some
one will be sure to say, "Out on thee! Adrastus, for the evil bridegroom
thou hast brought unto thy house; thanks to one maid's marriage, ruin
is come on us." 

Towards two evils, my son, art thou hasting,-loss of influence there
and ruin in the midst of thy efforts here. Oh! my children, lay aside
your violence; two men's follies, once they meet, result in very deadly
evil. 

LEADER O heaven, avert these troubles and reconcile the sons of Oedipus
in some way! 

ETEOCLES Mother, the season for parley is past; the time we still
delay is idle waste; thy good wishes are of no avail, for we shall
never be reconciled except upon the terms already named, namely, that
I should keep the sceptre and be king of this land: wherefore cease
these tedious warnings and let me be.  (Turning to POLYNEICES)  And
as for thee, outside the walls, or die! 

POLYNEICES Who will slay me? who is so invulnerable as to plunge
his sword in my body without reaping the self-same fate?

ETEOCLES Thou art near him, aye, very near; dost see my arm?

POLYNEICES I see it; but wealth is cowardly, a craven too fond of
life. 

ETEOCLES Was it then to meet a dastard thou camest with all that
host to war? 

POLYNEICES In a general caution is better than foolhardiness.

ETEOCLES Relying on the truce, which saves thy life, thou turnest
boaster. 

POLYNEICES Once more I ask thee to restore my sceptre and share in
the kingdom. 

ETEOCLES I have naught to restore; 'tis my own house, and I will
dwell therein. 

POLYNEICES What! and keep more than thy share? 

ETEOCLES Yes, I will. Begone! 

POLYNEICES O altars of my fathers' gods!- 

ETEOCLES Which thou art here to raze. 

POLYNEICES Hear me. 

ETEOCLES Who would hear thee after thou hast marched against thy
fatherland? 

POLYNEICES O temples of those gods that ride on snow-white steeds!

ETEOCLES They hate thee. 

POLYNEICES I am being driven from my country. 

ETEOCLES Because thou camest to drive others thence. 

POLYNEICES Unjustly, O ye gods! 

ETEOCLES Call on the gods at Mycenae, not here. 

POLYNEICES Thou hast outraged right- 

ETEOCLES But I have not like thee become my country's foe.

POLYNEICES By driving me forth without my portion. 

ETEOCLES And further I will slay thee. 

POLYNEICES O father, dost thou hear what I am suffering?

ETEOCLES Yea, and he hears what thou art doing. 

POLYNEICES Thou too, mother mine? 

ETEOCLES Thou hast no right to mention thy mother. 

POLYNEICES O my city! 

ETEOCLES Get thee to Argos, and invoke the waters of Lerna.

POLYNEICES I will; trouble not thyself; all thanks to thee though,
mother mine- 

ETEOCLES Forth from the land! 

POLYNEICES I go, yet grant me to behold my father. 

ETEOCLES Thou shalt not have thy wish. 

POLYNEICES At least then my tender sisters. 

ETEOCLES No! them too thou shalt never see. 

POLYNEICES Ah, sisters mine! 

ETEOCLES Why dost thou, their bitterest foe, call on them?

POLYNEICES Mother dear, to thee at least farewell! 

JOCASTA A joyous faring mine in sooth, my son! 

POLYNEICES Thy son no more! 

JOCASTA Born to sorrow, endless sorrow, I! 

POLYNEICES 'Tis because my brother treats me despitefully.

ETEOCLES I am treated just the same. 

POLYNEICES Where wilt thou be stationed before the towers?

ETEOCLES Why ask me this? 

POLYNEICES I will array myself against thee for thy death.

ETEOCLES I too have the same desire. 

JOCASTA Woe is me! what will ye do, my sons? 

POLYNEICES The event will show. 

JOCASTA Oh, fly your father's curse!  (JOCASTA enters the palace.)

ETEOCLES Destruction seize our whole house! 

POLYNEICES Soon shall my sword be busy, plunged in gore. But I call
my native land and heaven too to witness, with what contumely and
bitter treatment I am being driven forth, as though I were a slave,
not a son of Oedipus as much as he. If aught happen to thee, my city,
blame him, not me; for I came not willingly, and all unwillingly am
I driven hence. Farewell, king Phoebus, lord of highways; farewell
palace and comrades; farewell ye statues of the gods, at which men
offer sheep; for I know not if shall ever again address you, though
hope is still awake, which makes me confident that with heaven's help
I shall slay this fellow and rule my native Thebes.  (POLYNEICES departs.)

ETEOCLES Forth from the land! 'twas a true name our father gave thee,
when, prompted by some god, he called thee Polyneices, a name denoting
strife. 

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

To this land came Cadmus of Tyre, at whose feet an unyoked heifer
threw itself down, giving effect to an oracle on the spot where the
god's response bade him take up his abode in Aonia's rich cornlands,
where gushing Dirce's fair rivers of water pour o'er verdant fruitful
fields; here was born the Bromian god by her whom Zeus made a mother,
round whom the ivy twined its wreaths while he was yet a babe, swathing
him amid the covert of its green foliage as child of happy destiny,
to be a theme for Bacchic revelry among the maids and wives inspired
in Thebes. 

(antistrophe)

There lay Ares' murderous dragon, a savage warder, watching with
roving eye the watered glens and quickening streams; him did Cadmus
slay with a jagged stone, when he came thither to draw him lustral
water, smiting that fell head with a blow of his death-dealing arm;
but by the counsel of Pallas, motherless goddess, he cast the teeth
upon the earth into deep furrows, whence sprang to sight mail-clad
host above the surface of the soil; but grim slaughter once again
united them to the earth they loved, bedewing with blood the ground
that had disclosed them to the sunlit breath of heaven. 

(epode)

Thee too, Epaphus, child of Zeus, sprung from Io our ancestress,
call on in my foreign tongue; all hail to thee! hear my prayer uttered
in accents strange, and visit this land; 'twas in thy honour thy descendants
settled here, and those goddesses of twofold name, Persephone and
kindly Demeter or Earth the queen of all, that feedeth every mouth,
won it for themselves; send to the help of this land those torch-bearing
queens; for to gods all things are easy. 

ETEOCLES  (to an attendant) Go, fetch Creon son of Menoeceus, the
brother of jocasta my mother; tell him I fain would confer with him
on matters affecting our public and private weal, before we set out
to battle and the arraying of our host. But lo! he comes and saves
thee the trouble of going; I see him on his way to my palace.  (CREON
enters.)  

CREON To and fro have I been, king Eteocles, in my desire to see
thee, and have gone all round the gates and sentinels of Thebes in
quest of thee. 

ETEOCLES Why, and I was anxious to see thee, Creon; for I found the
terms of peace far from satisfactory, when I came to confer with Polyneices.

CREON I hear that he has wider aims than Thebes, relying on his alliance
with the daughter of Adrastus and his army. Well, we must leave this
dependent on the gods; meantime I am come to tell thee our chief obstacle.

ETEOCLES What is that? I do not understand what thou sayest.

CREON There is come one that was captured by the Argives.

ETEOCLES What news does he bring from their camp? 

CREON He says the Argive army intend at once to draw a ring of troops
round the city of Thebes, about its towers. 

ETEOCLES In that case the city of Cadmus must lead out its troops.

CREON Whither? art thou so young that thine eyes see not what they
should? 

ETEOCLES Across yon trenches for immediate action. 

CREON Our Theban forces are small, while theirs are numberless.

ETEOCLES I well know they are reputed brave. 

CREON No mean repute have those Argives among Hellenes.

ETEOCLES Never fear! I will soon fill the plain with their dead.

CREON I could wish it so; but I see great difficulties in this.

ETEOCLES Trust me, I will not keep my host within the walls.

CREON Still victory is entirely a matter of good counsel.

ETEOCLES Art anxious then that I should have recourse to any other
scheme? 

CREON Aye to every scheme, before running the risk once for all.

ETEOCLES Suppose we fall on them by night from ambuscade?

CREON Good! provided in the event of defeat thou canst secure thy
return hither. 

ETEOCLES Night equalizes risks, though it rather favours daring.

CREON The darkness of night is a terrible time to suffer disaster.

ETEOCLES Well, shall I fall upon them as they sit at meat?

CREON That might cause them fright, but victory is what we want.

ETEOCLES Dirce's ford is deep enough to prevent their retreat.

CREON No plan so good as to keep well guarded. 

ETEOCLES What if our cavalry make a sortie against the host of Argos?

CREON Their troops too are fenced all round with chariots.

ETEOCLES What then can I do? am I to surrender the city to the foe?

CREON Nay, nay! but of thy wisdom form some plan. 

ETEOCLES Pray, what scheme is wiser than mine? 

CREON They have seven chiefs, I hear. 

ETEOCLES What is their appointed task? their might can be but feeble.

CREON To lead the several companies and storm our seven gates.

ETEOCLES What are we to do? I will not wait till every chance is
gone. 

CREON Choose seven chiefs thyself to set against them at the gates.

ETEOCLES To lead our companies, or to fight single-handed?

CREON Choose our very bravest men to lead the troops. 

ETEOCLES I understand; to repel attempts at scaling our walls.

CREON With others to share the command, for one man sees not everything.

ETEOCLES Selecting them for courage or thoughtful prudence?

CREON For both; for one is naught without the other. 

ETEOCLES It shall be done; I will away to our seven towers and post
captains at the gates, as thou advisest, pitting them man for man
against the foe. To tell thee each one's name were grievous waste
of time, when the foe is camped beneath our very walls. But I will
go, that my hands may no longer hang idle. May I meet my brother face
to face, and encounter him hand to hand, e'en to the death, for coming
to waste my country! But if I suffer any mischance, thou must see
to the marriage 'twixt Antigone my sister and Haemon, thy son; and
now, as I go forth to battle, I ratify their previous espousal. Thou
art my mother's brother, so why need I say more? take care of her,
as she deserves, both for thy own sake and mine. As for my sire he
hath been guilty of folly against himself in putting out his eyes;
small praise have I for him; by his curses maybe he will slay us too.
One thing only have we still to do, to ask Teiresias, the seer, if
he has aught to tell of heaven's will. Thy son Menoeceus, who bears
thy father's name, will I send to fetch Teiresias hither, Creon; for
with the he will readily converse, though I have ere now so scorned
his art prophetic to his face, that he has reasons to reproach me.
This commandment, Creon, I lay upon the city and thee; should my cause
prevail, never give Polyneices' corpse a grave in Theban soil, and
if so be some friend should bury him, let death reward the man. Thus
far to thee; and to my servants thus, bring forth my arms and coat
of mail, that I may start at once for the appointed combat, with right
to lead to victory. To save our city we will pray to Caution, the
best goddess to serve our end.  (ETEOCLES and his retinue go out.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

O Ares, god of toil and trouble! why, why art thou possessed by love
of blood and death, out of harmony with the festivals of Bromius?
'Tis for no crowns of dancers fair that thou dost toss thy youthful
curls to the breeze, singing the while to the lute's soft breath a
strain to charm the dancers' feet; but with warriors clad in mail
thou dost lead thy sombre revelry, breathing into Argive breasts lust
for Theban blood; with no wild waving of the thyrsus, clad in fawnskin
thou dancest, but with chariots and bitted steeds wheelest thy charger
strong of hoof. O'er the waters of Ismenus in wild career thou art
urging thy horses, inspiring Argive breasts with hate of the earth-born
race, arraying in brazen harness against these stone-built walls a
host of warriors armed with shields. Truly Strife is a goddess to
fear, who devised these troubles for the princes of this land, for
the much-enduring sons of Labdacus. 

(antistrophe)

O Cithaeron, apple of the eye of Artemis, holy vale of leaves, amid
whose snows full many a beast lies couched, would thou hadst never
reared the child exposed to die, Oedipus the fruit of Jocasta's womb,
when as a babe he was cast forth from his home, marked with golden
brooch; and would the Sphinx, that winged maid, fell monster from
the hills, had never come to curse our land with inharmonious strains;
she that erst drew nigh our walls and snatched the sons of Cadmus
away in her taloned feet to the pathless fields of light, a fiend
sent by Hades from hell to plague the men of Thebes; once more unhappy
strife is bursting out between the sons of Oedipus in city and home.
For never can wrong be right, nor children of unnatural parentage
come as a glory to the mother that bears them, but as a stain on the
marriage of him who is father and brother at once. 

(epode)

O earth, thou once didst bear,-so long ago I heard the story told
by foreigners in my own home,-a race which sprang of the teeth of
a snake with blood-red crest, that fed on beasts, to be the glory
and reproach of Thebes. In days gone by the sons of heaven came to
the wedding of Harmonia, and the walls of Thebes arose to the sound
of the lyre and her towers stood up as Amphion played, in the midst
between the double streams of Dirce, that watereth the green meadows
fronting the Ismenus; and Io, our horned ancestress was mother of
the kings of Thebes; thus our city through an endless succession of
divers blessings has set herself upon the highest pinnacle of martial
glory.  (TEIRESIAS enters, led by his daughter. They are accompanied
by MENOECEUS.)  

TEIRESIAS Lead on, my daughter; for thou art as an eye to my blind
feet, as certain as a star to mariners; lead my steps on to level
ground; then go before, that we stumble not, for thy father has no
strength; keep safe for me in thy maiden hand the auguries I took
in the days I observed the flight and cries of birds seated in my
holy prophet's chair. Tell me, young Menoeceus, son of Creon, how
much further toward the city is it ere reach thy father? for my knees
grow weary, and I can scarce keep up this hurried pace. 

CREON Take heart, Teiresias, for thou hast reached thy moorings and
art near thy friends; take him by the hand, my child; for just as
every carriage has to wait for outside help to steady it, so too hath
the step of age. 

TEIRESIAS Enough; I have arrived; why, Creon, dost thou summon me
so urgently? 

CREON I have not forgotten that; but first collect thyself and regain
breath, shaking off the fatigue of thy journey. 

TEIRESIAS I am indeed worn out, having arrived here only yesterday
from the court of the Erechtheidae; for they too were at war, fighting
with Eumolpus, in which contest I insured the victory of Cecrops'
sons; and I received the golden crown, which thou seest me wearing,
as first-fruits of the enemy's spoil. 

CREON I take thy crown of victory as an omen. We, as thou knowest,
are exposed to the billows of an Argive war, and great is the struggle
for Thebes. Eteocles, our king, is already gone in full harness to
meet Mycenae's champions, and hath bidden me inquire of thee our best
course to save the city. 

TEIRESIAS For Eteocles I would have closed my lips and refrained
from all response, but to thee I will speak, since 'tis thy wish to
learn. This country, Creon, has been long afflicted, ever since Laius
became a father in heaven's despite, begetting hapless Oedipus to
be his own mother's husband. That bloody outrage on his eyes was planned
by heaven as an ensample to Hellas; and the sons of Oedipus made a
gross mistake in wishing to throw over it the veil of time, as if
forsooth they could outrun the gods' decree; for by robbing their
father of his due honour and allowing him no freedom, they enraged
their luckless sire; so he, stung by suffering and disgrace as well,
vented awful curses against them; and I, because I left nothing undone
or unsaid to prevent this, incurred the hatred of the sons of Oedipus.
But death inflicted by each other's hands awaits them, Creon; and
the many heaps of slain, some from Argive, some from Theban missiles,
shall cause bitter lamentation in the land of Thebes. Alas! for thee,
poor city, thou art being involved in their ruin, unless I can persuade
one man. The best course was to prevent any child of Oedipus becoming
either citizen or king in this land, since they were under a ban and
would overthrow the city. But as evil has the mastery of good, there
is still one other way of safety; but this it were unsafe for me to
tell, and painful too for those whose high fortune it is to supply
their city witb the saving cure. Farewell! I will away; amongst the
rest must I endure my doom, if need be; for what will become of me?

CREON Stay here, old man. 

TEIRESIAS Hold me not. 

CREON Abide, why dost thou seek to fly? 

TEIRESIAS 'Tis thy fortune that flies thee, not I. 

CREON Tell me what can save Thebes and her citizens. 

TEIRESIAS Though this be now thy wish, it will soon cease to be.

CREON Not wish to save my country? how can that be? 

TEIRESIAS Art thou still eager to be told? 

CREON Yea; for wherein should I show greater zeal? 

TEIRESIAS Then straightway shalt thou hear my words prophetic. But
first would fain know for certain where Menoeceus is, who led me hither.

CREON Here, not far away, but at thy side. 

TEIRESIAS Let him retire far from my prophetic voice. 

CREON He is my own son and will preserve due silence. 

TEIRESIAS Wilt thou then that I tell thee in his presence?

CREON Yea, for he will rejoice to hear the means of safety.

TEIRESIAS Then hear the purport of my oracle, the which if ye observe
ye shall save the city of Cadmus. Thou must sacrifice Menoeceus thy
son here for thy country, since thine own lips demand the voice of
fate. 

CREON What mean'st thou? what is this thou hast said, old man?

TEIRESIAS To that which is to be thou also must conform.

CREON O the eternity of woe thy minute's tale proclaims!

TEIRESIAS Yes to thee, but to thy country great salvation.

CREON I shut my ears; I never listened; to city now farewell!

TEIRESIAS Ha! the man is changed; he is drawing back. 

CREON Go in peace; it is not thy prophecy I need. 

TEIRESIAS Is truth dead, because thou art curst with woe?

CREON By thy knees and honoured locks I implore thee! 

TEIRESIAS Why implore me? thou art craving a calamity hard to guard
against. 

CREON Keep silence; tell not the city thy news. 

TEIRESIAS Thou biddest me act unjustly; I will not hold my peace.

CREON What wilt thou then do to me? slay my child? 

TEIRESIAS That is for others to decide; I have but to speak.

CREON Whence came this curse on me and my son? 

TEIRESIAS Thou dost right to ask me and to test what I have said.
In yonder lair, where the earth-born dragon kept watch and ward o'er
Dirce's springs, must this youth be offered and shed his life-blood
on the ground by reason of Ares' ancient grudge against Cadmus, who
thus avenges the slaughter of his earth-born snake. If ye do this,
ye shall win Ares as an ally; and if the earth receive crop for crop
and human blood for blood, ye shall find her kind again, that erst
to your sorrow reared from that dragon's seed a crop of warriors with
golden casques; for needs must one sprung from the dragon's teeth
be slain. Now thou art our only survivor of the seed of that sown
race, whose lineage is pure alike on mother's and on father's side,
thou and these thy sons. Haemon's marriage debars him from being the
victim, for he is no longer single; for even if he have not consummated
his marriage, yet is he betrothed; but this tender youth, consecrated
to the city's service, might by dying rescue his country; and bitter
will he make the return of Adrastus and his Argives, flinging o'er
their eyes death's dark pall, and will glorify Thebes. Choose thee
one of these alternatives; either save the city or thy son.

Now hast thou all I have to say. Daughter, lead me home. A fool, the
man who practises the diviner's art; for if he should announce an
adverse answer, he makes himself disliked by those who seek to him;
while, if from pity he deceives those who are consulting him, he sins
against Heaven. Phoebus should have been man's only prophet, for he
fears no man.  (His daughter leads TEIRESIAS out.)  

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Why so silent, Creon, why are thy lips hushed
and dumb? I too am no less stricken with dismay. 

CREON Why, what could one say? 'Tis clear what my words must be.
For will never plunge myself so deeply into misfortune as to devote
my son to death for the city; for love of children binds all men to
life, and none would resign his own son to die. Let no man praise
me into slaying my children. I am ready to die myself-for I am ripe
in years-to set my country free. But thou, my son, ere the whole city
learn this, up and fly with all haste away from this land, regardless
of these prophets' unbridled utterances; for he will go to the seven
gates and the captains there and tell all this to our governors and
leaders; now if we can forestall him, thou mayst be saved, but if
thou art too late, we are undone and thou wilt die. 

MENOECEUS Whither can I fly? to what city? to which of our guest-friends?

CREON Fly where thou wilt be furthest removed from this land.

MENOECEUS 'Tis for thee to name a place, for me to carry out thy
bidding. 

CREON After passing Delphi- 

MENOECEUS Whither must I go, father? 

CREON To Aetolia. 

MENOECEUS Whither thence? 

CREON To the land of Thesprotia. 

MENOECEUS To Dodona's hallowed threshold? 

CREON Thou followest me. 

MENOECEUS What protection shall I find me there? 

CREON The god will send thee on thy way. 

MENOECEUS How shall I find the means? 

CREON I will supply thee with money. 

MENOECEUS A good plan of thine, father. So go; for I will to thy
sister, Jocasta, at whose breast I was suckled as a babe when reft
of my mother and left a lonely orphan, to give her kindly greeting
and then will I seek my safety. Come, come! be going, that there be
no hindrance on thy part.  (CREON departs.)  How cleverly, ladies,
I banished my father's fears by crafty words to gain my end; for he
is trying to convey me hence, depriving the city of its chance and
surrendering me to cowardice. Though an old man may be pardoned, yet
in my case there is no excuse for betraying the country that gave
me birth. So I will go and save the city, be assured thereof, and
give my life up for this land. For this were shame, that they whom
no oracles bind and who have not come under Fate's iron law, should
stand there, shoulder to shoulder, with never a fear of death, and
fight for their country before her towers, while I escape the kingdom
like a coward, a traitor to my father and brother and city; and wheresoe'er
I live, I shall appear a dastard. Nay, by Zeus and all his stars,
by Ares, god of blood, who 'stablished the warrior-crop that sprung
one day from earth as princes of this land, that shall not be! but
go I will, and standing on the topmost battlements, will deal my own
death-blow over the dragon's deep dark den, the spot the seer described,
and will set my country free. I have spoken. Now I go to make the
city a present of my life, no mean offering, to rid this kingdom of
its affliction. For if each were to take and expend all the good within
his power, contributing it to his country's weal, our states would
experience fewer troubles and would for the future prosper.  (MENOECEUS
goes out.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Thou cam'st, O winged fiend, spawn of earth and hellish viper-brood,
to prey upon the sons of Cadmus, rife with death and fraught with
sorrow, half a monster, half a maid, a murderous prodigy, with roving
wings and ravening claws, that in days gone by didst catch up youthful
victims from the haunts of Dirce, with discordant note, bringing a
deadly curse, a woe of bloodshed to our native land. A murderous god
he was who brought all this to pass. In every house was heard a cry
of mothers wailing and of wailing maids, lamentation and the voice
of weeping, as each took up the chant of death from street to street
in turn. Loud rang the mourners' wail, and one great cry went up,
whene'er that winged maiden bore some victim out of sight from the
city. 

(antistrophe)

At last came Oedipus, the man of sorrow, on his mission from Delphi
to this land of Thebes, a joy to them then but afterwards cause of
grief; for, when he had read the riddle triumphantly, he formed with
his mother an unhallowed union, woe to him! polluting the city; and
by his curses, luckless wight, he plunged his sons into a guilty strife,
causing them to wade through seas of blood. All reverence do we feel
for him, who is gone to his death in his country's cause, bequeathing
to Creon a legacy of tears, but destined to crown with victory our
seven fenced towers. May our motherhood be blessed with such noble
sons, O Pallas, kindly queen, who with well-aimed stone didst spill
the serpent's blood, rousing Cadmus as thou didst to brood upon the
task, whereof the issue was a demon's curse that swooped upon this
land and harried it.  (The FIRST MESSENGER enters.)  

MESSENGER Ho there! who is at the palace-gates? Open the door, summon
Jocasta forth. Ho there! once again I call; spite of this long delay
come forth; hearken, noble wife of Oedipus; cease thy lamentation
and thy tears of woe.  (JOCASTA enters from the palace in answer to
his call.)  

JOCASTA Surely thou art not come, my friend, with the sad news of
Eteocles' death, beside whose shield thou hast ever marched, warding
from him the foeman's darts? What tidings art thou here to bring me?
Is my son alive or dead? Declare that to me. 

MESSENGER To rid thee of thy fear at once, he lives; that terror
banish. 

JOCASTA Next, how is it with the seven towers that wall us in?

MESSENGER They stand unshattered still; the city is not yet a prey.

JOCASTA Have they been in jeopardy of the Argive spear?

MESSENGER Aye, on the very brink; but our Theban warriors proved
too strong for Mycenae's might. 

JOCASTA One thing tell me, I implore; knowest thou aught of Polyneices,
is he yet alive? for this too I long to learn. 

MESSENGER As yet thy sons are living, the pair of them.

JOCASTA God bless thee! How did you succeed in beating off from our
gates the Argive hosts, when thus beleaguered? Tell me, that I may
go within and cheer the old blind man, since our city is still safe.

MESSENGER After Creon's son, who gave up life for country, had taken
his stand on the turret's top and plunged a sword dark-hilted through
his throat to save this land, thy son told off seven companies with
their captains to the seven gates to keep watch on the Argive warriors,
and stationed cavalry to cover cavalry, and infantry to support infantry,
that assistance might be close at hand for any weak point in the walls.
Then from our lofty towers we saw the Argive host with their white
shields leaving Teumessus, and, when near the trench, they charged
up to our Theban city at the double. In one loud burst from their
ranks and from our battlements rang out the battle-cry and trumpet-call.
First to the Neistian gate, Parthenopaeus, son of the huntress maid,
led a company bristling with serried shields, himself with his own
peculiar badge in the centre of his targe, Atalanta slaying the Aetolian
boar with an arrow shot from far. To the gates of Proetus came the
prophet Amphiaraus, bringing the victims on a chariot; no vaunting
blazon he carried, but weapons chastely plain. Next, prince Hippomedon
came marching to the Ogygian port with this device upon his boss,
Argus the all-seeing with his spangled eyes upon the watch whereof
some open with the rising stars, while others he closes when they
set, as one could see after he was slain. At the Homoloian gates Tydeus
was posting himself, a lion's skin with shaggy mane upon his buckler,
while in his right hand he bore a torch, like Titan Prometheus, to
fire the town. Thy own son Polyneices led the battle 'gainst the Fountain
gate; upon his shield for blazon were the steeds of Potniae galloping
at frantic speed, revolving by some clever contrivance on pivots inside
the buckler close to the handle, so as to appear distraught. At Electra's
gate famed Capaneus brought up his company, bold as Ares for the fray;
this device his buckler bore upon its iron back, an earth-born giant
carrying on his shoulders a whole city which he had wrenched from
its base, hint to us of the fate in store for Thebes. Adrastus was
stationed at the seventh gate; a hundred vipers filled his shield
with graven work, as he bore on his left arm that proud Argive badge,
the hydra, and serpents were carrying off in their jaws the sons of
Thebes from within their very walls. Now I was enabled to see each
of them, as I carried the watch-word along the line to the leaders
of our companies. To begin with, we fought with bows and thonged javelins,
with slings that shoot from far and showers of crashing stones; and
as we were conquering, Tydeus and thy son on sudden cried aloud, "Ye
sons of Argos, before being riddled by their fire, why delay to fall
upon the gates with might and main, the whole of you, light-armed
and horse and charioteers?" No loitering then, soon as they heard
that call; and many a warrior fell with bloody crown, and not a few
of us thou couldst have seen thrown to the earth like tumblers before
the walls, after they had given up the ghost, bedewing the thirsty
ground with streams of gore. Then Atalanta's son, who was not an Argive
but an Arcadian, hurling himself like a hurricane at the gates, called
for fire and picks to raze the town; but Periclymenus, son of the
ocean-god, stayed his wild career, heaving on his head a waggon-load
of stone, even the coping torn from the battlements; and it shattered
his head with the hair and crashed through the sutures of the skull,
dabbling with blood his cheek just showing manhood's flush; and never
shall he go back alive to his fair archer-mother, the maid of Maenalus.

Thy son then, seeing these gates secure, went on to the next, and
I with him. There I saw Tydeus and his serried ranks of targeteers
hurling their Aetolian spears into the opening at the top of the turrets,
with such good aim that our men fled and left the beetling battlements:
but thy son rallied them once more, as a huntsman cheers his hounds,
and made them man the towers again. And then away we hastened to other
gates, after stopping the panic there. As for the madness of Capaneus,
how am I to describe it? There was he, carrying with him a long scaling-ladder
and loudly boasting that even the awful lightning of Zeus would not
stay him from giving the city to utter destruction; and even as he
spoke, he crept up beneath the hail of stones, gathered under the
shelter of his shield, mounting from rung to rung on the smooth ladder;
but, just as he was scaling the parapet of the wall, Zeus smote him
with a thunderbolt; loud the earth re-echoed, and fear seized every
heart; for his limbs were hurled from the ladder far apart as from
a sling, his head toward the sky, his blood toward earth, while his
legs and arms went spinning round like Ixion's wheel, till his charred
corpse fell to the ground. But when Adrastus saw that Zeus was leagued
against his army, he drew the Argive troops outside the trench and
halted them. Meantime our horse, marking the lucky omen of Zeus, began
driving forth their chariots, and our men-at-arms charged into the
thick of the Argives, and everything combined to their discomfiture;
men were falling and hurled headlong from chariots, wheels flew off,
axles crashed together, while ever higher grew the heaps of slain;
so for to-day at least have we prevented the destruction of our country's
bulwarks; but whether fortune will hereafter smile upon this land,
that rests with Heaven; for, even as it is, it owes its safety to
some deity. 

Victory is fair; and if the gods are growing kinder, it would be well
with me. 

JOCASTA Heaven and fortune smile; for my sons are yet alive and my
country hath escaped ruin. But Creon seems to have reaped the bitter
fruit of my marriage with Oedipus, by losing his son to his sorrow,
a piece of luck-for Thebes, but bitter grief to him. Prithee to thy
tale again and say what my two sons next intend. 

MESSENGER Forbear to question further; all is well with thee so far.

JOCASTA Thy words but rouse my suspicions; I cannot leave it thus.

MESSENGER Hast thou any further wish than thy sons' safety?

JOCASTA Yea, I would learn whether in the sequel I am also blest.

MESSENGER Let me go; thy son is left without his squire.

JOCASTA There is some evil thou art hiding, veiling it in darkness.

MESSENGER Maybe; I would not add ill news to the good thou hast heard.

JOCASTA Thou must, unless thou take wings and fly away.

MESSENGER Ah! why didst thou not let me go after announcing my good
news, instead of forcing me to disclose evil? Those two sons of thine
are resolved on deeds of shameful recklessness, a single combat apart
from the host, addressing to Argives and Thebans alike words I would
they had never uttered. Eteocles, taking his stand on a lofty tower,
after ordering silence to be proclaimed to the army, began on this
wise, "Ye captains of Hellas, chieftains of Argos here assembled,
and ye folk of Cadmus, barter not your lives for Polyneices or for
me! For I myself excuse you from this risk, and will engage my brother
in single combat; and if I slay him, will possess my palace without
rival, but if I am worsted I will bequeath the city to him. Ye men
of Argos, give up the struggle and return to your land, nor lose your
lives here; of the earth-sown folk as well there are dead enough in
those already slain." 

So he; then thy son Polyneices rushed from the array and assented
to his proposal; and all the Argives and the people of Cadmus shouted
their approval, as though they deemed it just. On these terms the
armies made a truce, and in the space betwixt them took an oath of
each other for their leaders to abide by. Forthwith in brazen mail
those two sons of aged Oedipus were casing themselves; and lords of
Thebes with friendly care equipped the captain of this land, while
Argive chieftains armed the other. There they stood in dazzling sheen,
neither blenching, all eagerness to hurl their lances each at the
other. Then came their friends to their side, first one, then another,
with words of encouragement, to wit: 

"Polyneices, it rests with thee to set up an image of Zeus as a trophy,
and crown Argos with fair renown." 

Others hailed Eteocles: "Now art thou fighting for thy city; now,
if victorious, thou hast the sceptre in thy power." 

So spake they, cheering them to the fray. 
Meantime the seers were sacrificing sheep and noting the tongues and
forks of fire, the damp reek which is a bad omen, and the tapering
flame, which gives decisions on two points, being both a sign of victory
and defeat. But, if thou hast any power or subtle speech or charmed
spell, go, stay thy children from this fell affray, for great is the
risk they run. The issue thereof will be grievous sorrow for thee,
if to-day thou art reft of both thy sons.  (The MESSENGER departs
in haste as ANTIGONE comes out of the palace.)  

JOCASTA Antigone, my daughter, come forth before the palace; this
heaven-sent crisis is no time for thee to be dancing or amusing thyself
with girlish pursuits. But thou and thy mother must prevent two gallant
youths, thy own brothers, from plunging into death and falling by
each other's hand. 

ANTIGONE Mother mine, what new terror art thou proclaiming to thy
dear ones before the palace? 

JOCASTA Daughter, thy brothers are in danger of their life.

ANTIGONE What mean'st thou? 

JOCASTA They have resolved on single combat. 

ANTIGONE O horror! what hast thou to tell, mother? 

JOCASTA No welcome news; follow me. 

ANTIGONE Whither away from my maiden-bower? 

JOCASTA To the army. 

ANTIGONE I cannot face the crowd. 

JOCASTA Modesty is not for thee now. 

ANTIGONE But what can I do? 

JOCASTA Thou shalt end thy brothers' strife. 

ANTIGONE By what means, mother mine? 

JOCASTA By falling at their knees with me. 

ANTIGONE Lead on till we are 'twixt the armies; no time for lingering
now. 

JOCASTA Haste, my daughter, haste! For, if I can forestall the onset
of my sons, may yet live; but if they be dead, I will lay me down
and die with them.  (JOCASTA and ANTIGONE hurriedly depart.)

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Ah me! my bosom thrills with terror; and through my flesh there passes
a throb of pity for the hapless mother. Which of her two sons will
send the other to a bloody grave? ah, woe is me! O Zeus, O earth,
alas! brother severing brother's throat and robbing him of life, cleaving
through his shield to spill his blood? Ah me! ah me! which of them
will claim my dirge of death? 

(antistrophe)

Woe unto thee, thou land of Thebes! two savage beasts, two murderous
souls, with brandished spears will soon be draining each his fallen
foeman's gore. Woe is them, that they ever thought of single combat!
in foreign accent will I chant a dirge of tears and wailing in mourning
for the dead. Close to murder stands their fortune; the coming day
will decide it. Fatal, ah! fatal will this slaughter be, because of
the avenging fiends. 

But I see Creon on his way hither to the palace with brow o'ercast;
I will check my present lamentations.  (CREON enters. He is followed
by attendants carrying the body of MENOECEUS.)  

CREON Ah me! what shall I do? Am I to mourn with bitter tears myself
or my city, round which is settling a swarm thick enough to send us
to Acheron? My own son hath died for his country, bringing glory to
his name but grievous woe to me. His body I rescued but now from the
dragon's rocky lair and sadly carried the self-slain victim hither
in my arms; and my house is fallen with weeping: but now I come to
fetch my sister Jocasta, the living must reverence the nether god
by paying honour to the dead. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Thy sister, Creon, hath gone forth and her daughter
Antigone went with her. 

CREON Whither went she? and wherefore? tell me. 

LEADER She heard that her sons were about to engage in single combat
for the royal house. 

CREON What is this? I was paying the last honours to my dead son,
and so am late in learning this fresh sorrow. 

LEADER 'Tis some time, Creon, since thy sister's departure, and I
expect the struggle for life and death is already decided by the sons
of Oedipus. 

CREON Alas! I see an omen there, the gloomy look and clouded brow
of yonder messenger coming to tell us the whole matter.  (The SECOND
MESSENGER enters.)  

MESSENGER Ah, woe is me! what language can I find to tell my tale?

CREON Our fate is sealed; thy opening words do naught to reassure
us. 

MESSENGER Ah, woe is me! I do repeat; for beside the scenes of woe
already enacted I bring tidings of new horror. 

CREON What is thy tale? 

MESSENGER Thy sister's sons are now no more, Creon. 

CREON Alas! thou hast a heavy tale of woe for me and Thebes

LEADER O house of Oedipus, hast thou heard these tidings?

CREON Of sons slain by the self-same fate. 

LEADER A tale to make it weep, were it endowed with sense.

CREON Oh! most grievous stroke of fate! woe is me for my sorrows!
woe! 

MESSENGER Woe indeed! didst thou but know the sorrows still to tell.

CREON How can they be more hard to bear than these? 

MESSENGER With her two sons thy sister has sought her death.

CHORUS  (chanting) Loudly, loudly raise the wail, and with white
hands smite upon your heads! 

CREON Ah! woe is thee, Jocasta! what an end to life and marriage
hast thou found the riddling of the Sphinx! But tell me how her two
sons wrought the bloody deed, the struggle caused by the curse of
Oedipus. 

MESSENGER Of our successes before the towers thou knowest, for the
walls are not so far away as to prevent thy learning each event as
it occurred. Now when they, the sons of aged Oedipus, had donned their
brazen mail, they went and took their stand betwixt the hosts, chieftains
both and generals too, to decide the day by single combat. Then Polyneices,
turning his eyes towards Argos, lifted up a prayer; "O Hera, awful
queens-for thy servant I am, since I have wedded the daughter of Adrastus
and dwell in his land,-grant that I may slay my brother, and stain
my lifted hand with the blood of my conquered foe. A shameful prize
it is I ask, my own brother's blood." And to many an eye the tear
would rise at their sad fate, and men looked at one another, casting
their glances round. 

But Eteocles, looking towards the temple of Pallas with the golden
shield, prayed thus, "Daughter of Zeus, grant that this right arm
may launch the spear of victory against my brother's breast and slay
him who hath come to sack my country." Soon as the Tuscan trumpet
blew, the signal for the bloody fray, like the torch that falls,'
they darted wildly at one another and, like boars whetting their savage
tusks, began the fray, their beards wet with foam; and they kept shooting
out their spears, but each crouched beneath his shield to let the
steel glance idly off; but if either saw the other's face above the
rim, he would aim his lance thereat, eager to outwit him.

But both kept such careful outlook through the spy-holes in their
shields, that their weapons found naught to do; while from the on-lookers
far more than the combatants trickled the sweat caused by terror for
their friends. Suddenly Eteocles, in kicking aside a stone that rolled
beneath his tread, exposed a limb outside his shield, and Polyneices
seeing a chance of dealing him a blow, aimed a dart at it, and the
Argive shaft went through his leg; whereat the Danai, one and all,
cried out for joy. But the wounded man, seeing a shoulder unguarded
in this effort, plunged his spear with all his might into the breast
of Polyneices, restoring gladness to the citizens of Thebes, though
he brake off the spear-head; and so, at a loss for a weapon, he retreated
foot by foot, till catching up splintered rock he let it fly and shivered
the other's spear; and now was the combat equal, for each had lost
his lance. Then clutching their sword-hilts they closed, and round
and round, with shields close-locked, they waged their wild warfare.
Anon Eteocles introduced that crafty Thessalian trick, having some
knowledge thereof from his intercourse with that country; disengaging
himself from the immediate contest, he drew back his left foot but
kept his eye closely on the pit of the other's stomach from a distance;
then advancing his right foot he plunged his weapon through his navel
and fixed it in his spine. Down falls Polyneices, blood-bespattered,
ribs and belly contracting in his agony. But that other, thinking
his victory now complete, threw down his sword and set to spoiling
him, wholly intent thereon, without a thought for himself. And this
indeed was his ruin; for Polyneices, who had fallen first, was still
faintly breathing, and having in his grievous fall retained his sword,
he made last effort and drove it through the heart of Eteocles. There
they lie, fallen side by side, biting the dust with their teeth, without
having decided the mastery. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Ah, woe is thee! Oedipus, for thy sorrows! how
I pity thee! Heaven, it seems, has fulfilled those curses of thine.

MESSENGER Now hear what further woes succeeded. Just as her two sons
had fallen and lay dying, comes their wretched mother on the scene,
her daughter with her, in hot haste; and when she saw their mortal
wounds, "Too late," she moaned, "my sons, the help I bring"; and throwing
herself on each in turn she wept and wailed, sorrowing o'er all her
toil in suckling them; and so too their sister, who was with her,
"Supporters of your mother's age I dear brothers, leaving me forlorn,
unwed!" Then prince Eteocles with one deep dying gasp, hearing his
mother's cry, laid on her his moist hand, and though he could not
say a word, his tear-filled eyes were eloquent to prove his love.
But Polyneices was still alive, and seeing his sister and his aged
mother he said, "Mother mine, our end is come; I pity thee and my
sister Antigone and my dead brother. For I loved him though he turned
my foe, I loved him, yes! in spite of all. Bury me, mother mine, and
thou, my sister dear, in my native soil; pacify the city's wrath that
may get at least that much of my own fatherland, although I lost my
home. With thy hand, mother, close mine eyes  (therewith he himself
places her fingers on the lids)  ; and fare ye well; for already the
darkness wraps me round." 

So both at once breathed out their life of sorrow. But when their
mother saw this sad mischance, in her o'ermastering grief she snatched
from a corpse its sword and wrought an awful deed, driving the steel
right through her throat; and there she lies, dead with the dead she
loved so well, her arms thrown round them both. 

Thereon the host sprang to their feet and fell to wrangling, we maintaining
that victory rested with my master, they with theirs; and amid our
leaders the contention raged, some holding that Polyneices gave the
first wound with his spear, others that, as both were dead, victory
rested with neither. Meantime Antigone crept away from the host; and
those others rushed to their weapons, but by some lucky forethought
the folk of Cadmus had sat down under arms; and by a sudden attack
we surprised the Argive host before it was fully equipped. Not one
withstood our onset, and they filled the plain with fugitives, while
blood was streaming from the countless dead our spears had slain.
Soon as victory crowned our warfare, some began to rear an image to
Zeus for the foe's defeat, others were stripping the Argive dead of
their shields and sending their spoils inside the battlements; and
others with Antigone are bringing her dead brothers hither for their
friends to mourn. So the result of this struggle to our city hovers
between the two extremes of good and evil fortune.  (The MESSENGER
goes out.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) No longer do the misfortunes of this house extend
to hearsay only; three corpses of the slain lie here at the palace
for all to see, who by one common death have passed to their life
of gloom.  (During the lament, ANTIGONE enters, followed by servants
who hear the bodies Of JOCASTA, ETEOCLES, and POLYNEICES.)

ANTIGONE  (chanting) No veil I draw o'er my tender cheek shaded with
its clustering curls; no shame I feel from maiden modesty at the hot
blood mantling 'neath my eyes, the blush upon my face, as I hurry
wildly on in death's train, casting from my hair its tire and letting
my delicate robe of saffron hue fly loose, a tearful escort to the
dead. Ah me! 

Woe to thee, Polyneices! rightly named, I trow; woe to thee, Thebes!
no mere strife to end in strife was thine; but murder completed by
murder hath brought the house of Oedipus to ruin with bloodshed dire
and grim. O my home, my home! what minstrel can I summon from the
dead to chant a fitting dirge o'er my tearful fate, as I bear these
three corpses of my kin, my mother and her sons, welcome sight to
the avenging fiend that destroyed the house of Oedipus, root and branch,
in the hour that his shrewdness solved the Sphinx's riddling rhyme
and slew that savage songstress. Woe is me! my father! what other
Hellene or barbarian, what noble soul among the bygone tribes of man's
poor mortal race ever endured the anguish of such visible afflictions?

Ah! poor maid, how piteous is thy plaint! What bird from its covert
'mid the leafy oak or soaring pine-tree's branch will come to mourn
with me, the maid left motherless, with cries of woe, lamenting, ere
it comes, the piteous lonely life, that henceforth must be always
mine with tears that ever stream? On which of these corpses shall
I throw my offerings first, plucking the hair from my head? on the
breast of the mother that suckled me, or beside the ghastly death-wounds
of my brothers' corpses? Woe to thee, Oedipus, my aged sire with sightless
orbs, leave thy roof, disclose the misery of thy life, thou that draggest
out a weary existence within the house, having cast a mist of darkness
o'er thine eyes. Dost hear, thou whose aged step now gropes its way
across the court, now seeks repose on wretched pallet couch?  (OEDIPUS
enters from the palace. He chants the following lines responsively
with ANTIGONE.)  

OEDIPUS Why, daughter, hast thou dragged me to the light, supporting
my blind footsteps from the gloom of my chamber, where I lie upon
my bed and make piteous moan, a hoary sufferer, invisible as a phantom
of the air, or as a spirit from the pit, or as a dream that flies?

ANTIGONE Father, there are tidings of sorrow for thee to bear; no
more thy sons behold the light, or thy wife who ever would toil to
tend thy blind footsteps as with a staff. Alas for thee, my sire!

OEDIPUS Ah me, the sorrows I endure! I may well say that. Tell me,
child, what fate o'ertook those three, and how they left the light.

ANTIGONE Not to reproach or mock thee say I this, but in all sadness;
'tis thy own avenging curse, with all its load of slaughter, fire,
and ruthless war, that is fallen on thy sons. Alas for thee, my sire!

OEDIPUS Ah me! 

ANTIGONE Why dost thou groan? 

OEDIPUS 'Tis for my sons. 

ANTIGONE Couldst thou have looked towards yon sun-god's four-horsed
car and turned the light of thine eyes on these corpses, it would
have been agony to thee. 

OEDIPUS 'Tis clear enough how their evil fate o'ertook my sons; but
she, my poor wife tell me, daughter, how she came to die.

ANTIGONE All saw her weep and heard her moan, as she rushed forth
to carry to her sons her last appeal, a mother's breast. But the mother
found her sons at the Electran gate, in a meadow where the lotus blooms,
fighting out their duel like lions in their lair, eager to wound each
other with spears, their blood already congealed, a murderous libation
to the Death-god poured out by Ares. Then, snatching from corpse a
sword of hammered bronze, she plunged it in her flesh, and in sorrow
for her sons fell with her arms around them. So to-day, father, the
god, whose'er this issue is, has gathered to a head the sum of suffering
for our house. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS To-day is the beginning of many troubles to
the house of Oedipus; may he live to be more fortunate! 

CREON Cease now your lamentations; 'tis time we bethought us of their
burial. Hear what I have to say, Oedipus. Eteocles, thy son, left
me to rule this land, by assigning it as a marriage portion to Haemon
with the hand of thy daughter Antigone. Wherefore I will no longer
permit thee to dwell therein, for Teiresias plainly declared that
the city would never prosper so long as thou wert in the land. So
begone! And this I say not to flout thee, nor because I bear thee
any grudge, but from fear that some calamity will come upon the realm
by reason of those fiends that dog thy steps. 

OEDIPUS O destiny! to what a life of pain and sorrow didst thou bear
me beyond all men that ever were, e'en from the very first; yea for
when I was yet unborn, or ever I had left my mother's womb and seen
the light, Apollo foretold to Laius that I should become my father's
murderer; woe is me! So, as soon as I was born, my father tried to
end again the hapless life he had given, deeming me his foe, for it
was fated he should die at my hand; so he sent me still unweaned to
make a pitiful meal for beasts, but I escaped from that. Ah! would
that Cithaeron had sunk into hell's yawning abyss, in that it slew
me not! Instead thereof Fate made me a slave in the service of Polybus;
and I, poor wretch, after slaying my own father came to wed my mother
to her sorrow, and begat sons that were my brothers, whom also I have
destroyed, by bequeathing unto them the legacy of curses I received
from Laius. For nature did not make me so void of understanding, that
I should have devised these horrors against my own eyes and my children's
life without the intervention of some god. Let that pass. What am
I, poor wretch, to do? Who now will be my guide and tend the blind
man's step? Shall she, that is dead? Were she alive, I know right
well she would. My pair of gallant sons, then? But they are gone from
me. Am I still so young myself that I can find a livelihood? Whence
could I? O Creon, why seek thus to slay me utterly? For so thou wilt,
if thou banish me from the land. Yet will I never twine my arms about
thy knees and betray cowardice, for I will not belie my former gallant
soul, no! not for all my evil case. 

CREON Thy words are brave in refusing to touch my knees, and I am
equally resolved not to let thee abide in the land. For these dead,
bear one forth-with to the palace; but the other, who came with stranger
folk to sack his native town, the dead Polyneices, cast forth unburied
beyond our frontiers. To all the race of Cadmus shall this be proclaimed,
that whosoe'er is caught decking his corpse with wreaths or giving
it burial, shall be requited with death; unwept, unburied let him
lie, a prey to birds. As for thee, Antigone, leave thy mourning for
these lifeless three and betake thyself indoors to abide there in
maiden state until to-morrow, when Haemon waits to wed thee.

ANTIGONE O father, in what cruel misery are we plunged! For thee
I mourn more than for the dead; for in thy woes there is no opposite
to trouble, but universal sorrow is thy lot. As for thee, thou new-made
king, why, I ask, dost thou mock my father thus with banishment? Why
start making laws over a helpless corpse? 

CREON This was what Eteocles, not I, resolved. 

ANTIGONE A foolish thought, and foolish art thou for entertaining
it! 

CREON What! ought I not to carry out his behests? 

ANTIGONE No; not if they are wrong and ill-advised. 

CREON Why, is it not just for that other to be given to the dogs?

ANTIGONE Nay, the vengeance ye are exacting is no lawful one.

CREON It is; for he was his country's foe, though not a foeman born.

ANTIGONE Well, to fate he rendered up his destinies. 

CREON Let him now pay forfeit in his burial too. 

ANTIGONE What crime did he commit in coming to claim his heritage?

CREON Be very sure of this, yon man shall have no burial.

ANTIGONE I will bury him, although the state forbids. 

CREON Do so, and thou wilt be making thy own grave by his.

ANTIGONE A noble end, for two so near and dear to be laid side by
side! 

CREON  (to his servants) Ho! seize and bear her within the palace.

ANTIGONE Never! for I will not loose my hold upon this corpse.

CREON Heaven's decrees, girl, fit not thy fancies. 

ANTIGONE Decrees! here is another, "No insult to the dead."

CREON Be sure that none shall sprinkle over the corpse the moistened
dust. 

ANTIGONE O Creon, by my mother's corpse, by Jocasta, I implore thee!

CREON 'Tis but lost labour; thou wilt not gain thy prayer.

ANTIGONE Let me but bathe the dead body- 

CREON Nay, that would be part of what the city is forbidden.

ANTIGONE At least let me bandage the gaping wounds. 

CREON No; thou shalt never pay honour to this corpse. 

ANTIGONE O my darling! one kiss at least will I print upon thy lips.

CREON Do not let this mourning bring disaster on thy marriage.

ANTIGONE Marriage! dost think I will live to wed thy son?

CREON Most certainly thou must; how wilt thou escape his bed?

ANTIGONE Then if I must, our wedding-night will find another Danaid
bride in me. 

CREON  (turning to OEDIPUS) Dost witness how boldly she reproached
me? 

ANTIGONE Witness this steel, the sword by which I swear!

CREON Why art so bent on being released from this marriage?

ANTIGONE I mean to share my hapless father's exile. 

CREON A noble spirit thine but somewhat touched with folly.

ANTIGONE Likewise will I share his death, I tell thee further.

CREON Go, leave the land; thou shalt not murder son of mine.  (CREON
goes out, followed by his attendants who carry with them the body
Of MENOECEUS.)  

OEDIPUS Daughter, for this loyal spirit I thank thee. 

ANTIGONE Were I to wed, then thou, my father, wouldst be alone in
thy exile. 

OEDIPUS Abide here and be happy; I will bear my own load of sorrow.

ANTIGONE And who shall tend thee in thy blindness, father?

OEDIPUS Where fate appoints, there will I lay me down upon the ground.

ANTIGONE Where is now the famous Oedipus, where that famous riddle?

OEDIPUS Lost for ever! one day made, and one day marred my fortune.

ANTIGONE May not I too share thy sorrows? 

OEDIPUS To wander with her blinded sire were shame unto his child.

ANTIGONE Not so, father, but glory rather, if she be a maid discreet.

OEDIPUS Lead me nigh that I may touch thy mother's corpse.

ANTIGONE So! embrace the aged form so dear to thee. 

OEDIPUS Woe is thee, thy motherhood, thy marriage most unblest!

ANTIGONE A piteous corpse, a prey to every ill at once!

OEDIPUS Where lies the corpse of Eteocles, and of Polyneices, where?

ANTIGONE Both lie stretched before thee, side by side. 

OEDIPUS Lay the blind man's hand upon his poor sons' brows.

ANTIGONE There then! touch the dead, thy children. 

OEDIPUS Woe for you! dear fallen sons, sad offspring of a sire as
sad! 

ANTIGONE O my brother Polyneices, name most dear to me!

OEDIPUS Now is the oracle of Loxias being fulfilled, my child.

ANTIGONE What oracle was that? canst thou have further woes to tell?

OEDIPUS That I should die in glorious Athens after a life of wandering.

ANTIGONE Where? what fenced town in Attica will take thee in?

OEDIPUS Hallowed Colonus, home of the god of steeds. Come then, attend
on thy blind father, since thou art minded to share his exile.  (OEDIPUS
and ANTIGONE chant their remaining lines as they slowly depart.)

ANTIGONE To wretched exile go thy way; stretch forth thy hand, my
aged sire, taking me to guide thee, like a breeze that speedeth barques.

OEDIPUS See, daughter, I am advancing; be thou my guide, poor child.

ANTIGONE Ah, poor indeed! the saddest maid of all in Thebes.

OEDIPUS Where am I planting my aged step? Bring my staff, child.

ANTIGONE This way, this way, father mine! plant thy footsteps here,
like dream for all the strength thou hast. 

OEDIPUS Woe unto thee that art driving my aged limbs in grievous
exile from their land! Ah me! the sorrows I endure! 

ANTIGONE "Endure"! why speak of enduring? Justice regardeth not the
sinner and requiteth not men's follies. 

OEDIPUS I am he whose name passed into high songs of victory because
I guessed the maiden's baffling riddle. 

ANTIGONE Thou art bringing up again the reproach of the Sphinx. Talk
no more of past success. This misery was in store for thee all the
while, to become an exile from thy country and die thou knowest not
where; while I, bequeathing to my girlish friends tears of sad regret,
must go forth from my native land, roaming as no maiden ought.

Ah! this dutiful resolve will crown me with glory in respect of my
father's sufferings. Woe is me for the insults heaped on thee and
on my brother whose dead body is cast forth from the palace unburied;
poor boy! I will yet bury him secretly, though I have to die for it,
father. 

OEDIPUS To thy companions show thyself. 

ANTIGONE My own laments suffice. 

OEDIPUS Go pray then at the altars. 

ANTIGONE They are weary of my piteous tale. 

OEDIPUS At least go seek the Bromian god in his hallowed haunt amongst
the Maenads' hills. 

ANTIGONE Offering homage that is no homage in Heaven's eyes to him
in whose honour I once fringed my dress with the Theban fawn-skin
and led the dance upon the hills for the holy choir of Semele?

OEDIPUS My noble fellow-countrymen, behold me; I am Oedipus, who
solved the famous riddle, and once was first of men, I who alone cut
short the murderous Sphinx's tyranny am now myself expelled the land
in shame and misery. Go to; why make this moan and bootless lamentation?
Weak mortal as I am, I must endure the fate that God decrees.

CHORUS  (chanting) Hail majestic Victory! keep thou my life nor ever
cease to crown my song! 

THEEND
 

Before Hector's tent at the gates of Troy. Enter CHORUS

----------------------------------------------------------------------

CHORUS To Hector's couch away, one of you wakeful squires that tend
the prince, to see if he have any fresh tidings from the warriors
who were set to guard the assembled host during the fourth watch of
the night.  (Calls to HECTOR in the tent)  Lift up thy head! Prop
thine arm beneath it! Unseal that louring eye from its repose; thy
lowly couch of scattered leaves, O Hector, quit! 'Tis time to hearken.
(Enter HECTOR.)  

HECTOR Who goes there? Is it a friend who calls? Who art thou? Thy
watchword? Speak! Who in the dark hours comes nigh my couch, must
tell me who he is. 

CHORUS Sentinels we of the army. 

HECTOR Why this tumultuous haste? 

CHORUS Be of good courage. 

HECTOR Is there some midnight ambuscade? 

CHORUS Nay. 

HECTOR Then why dost thou desert thy post and rouse the army, save
thou have some tidings of the night? Art not aware how near the Argive
host we take our night's repose in all our harness clad?

CHORUS To arms! O Hector, seek thine allies' sleeping camp! Bid them
wield the spear! Awake them! thine own company despatch a friend.
Saddle and bridle the steeds. Who will to the son of Panthus? who
to Europa's son, captain of the Lycian band? Where are they who should
inspect the victims? Where be the leaders of the light-armed troops?
Ye Phrygian archers, string your horn-tipped bows. 

HECTOR Now fear, now confidence thy tidings inspire; nothing is plainly
set forth. Can it be that thou art smitten with wild affright by Pan,
the son of Cronion, and leaving thy watch therefore dost rouse the
host? What means thy noisy summons? What tidings can I say thou bringest?
Thy words are many, but no plain statement hast thou made.

CHORUS The long night through, O Hector, the Argive host hath kindled
fires, and bright with torches shines the anchored fleet. To Agamemnon's
tent the whole army moves clamorously by night, eager for fresh orders
maybe, for never before have I seen such commotion among yon sea-faring
folk. Wherefore I was suspicious of what might happen and came to
tell thee, that thou mayest have no cause to blame me hereafter.

HECTOR In good season com'st thou, albeit thy tidings are fraught
with terror; for those cowards are bent on giving me the slip and
stealing away from this land in their ships by night; their midnight
signalling convinces me of this. Ah! Fortune, to rob me in my hour
of triumph, a lion of his prey, or ever this spear of mine with one
fell swoop had made an end for aye of yonder Argive host! Yea, had
not the sun's bright lamp withheld his light, I had not stayed my
victor's spear, ere I had fired their ships and made my way from tent
to tent, drenching this hand in Achaean gore. Right eager was I to
make a night attack and take advantage of the stroke of luck by heaven
sent, but those wise seers of mine, who have heaven's will so pat,
persuaded me to wait the dawn, and then leave not one Achaean in the
land. But those others await not the counsels of my soothsayers; darkness
turns runaways to heroes. Needs must we now without delay pass this
word along the line "Arm, arm! from slumber cease!" for many a man
of them, e'en as he leaps aboard his ship, shall be smitten through
the back and sprinkle the ladders with blood, and others shall be
fast bound with cords and learn to till our Phrygian glebe.

CHORUS Thou hastest, Hector, before thou knowest clearly what is
happening; for we do not know for certain whether our foes are flying.

HECTOR What reason else had the Argive host to kindle fires?

CHORUS I cannot say; my soul doth much misgive me. 

HECTOR If this thou fearest, be sure there's nought thou wouldst
not fear. 

CHORUS Never aforetime did the enemy kindle such a blaze.

HECTOR No, nor ever before did they suffer such shameful defeat and
rout. 

CHORUS This thou didst achieve; look now to what remains to do.

HECTOR I have but one word to say, "Arm, arm against the foe!"

CHORUS Lo! where Aeneas comes, in hot haste too, as though he hath
news to tell his friends.  (Enter ENEAS.)  

AENEAS Why, Hector, have the sentinels in terror made their way through
the host to thy couch to hold a midnight conclave and disturb the
army? 

HECTOR Case thee in thy coat of mail, Aeneas. 

AENEAS How now? are tidings come of some secret stratagem set on
foot during the night by the foe? 

HECTOR They are flying, these foes of ours, and going aboard their
ships. 

AENEAS What sure proof canst thou give of this? 

HECTOR The livelong night they are kindling blazing torches; methinks
they will not wait for the morrow, but after lighting brands upon
their ships' decks will leave this and to their homes. 

AENEAS And thou, wherefore dost thou gird thee with thy sword?

HECTOR With my spear will I stop them even as they fly and leap aboard
their ships, and my hand shail be heavy upon them; for shameful it
were in us, aye, and cowardly as well as shameful, when God gives
them into our hands, to let our foes escape without a blow after all
the injuries they have done us. 

AENEAS Would thou wert as sage as thou art bold But lo! among mortals
the same man is not dowered by nature with universal knowledge; each
hath his special gift appointed him, thine is arms, another's is sage
counsel. Thou hearest their torches are blazing, and art fired with
the hope that the Achaeans are flying, and wouldst lead on our troops
across the trenches in the calm still night. Now after crossing the
deep yawning trench, supposing thou shouldst find the enemy are not
flying from the land, but are awaiting thy onset, beware lest thou
suffer defeat and so never reach this city again; for how wilt thou
pass the palisades in a rout? And how shall thy charioteers cross
the bridges without dashing the axles of their cars to pieces? And,
if victorious, thou hast next the son of Peleus to engage; he will
ne'er suffer thee to cast the firebrand on the fleet, no, nor to harry
the Achaeans as thou dost fondly fancy. Nay, for yon man is fierce
as fire, a very tower of valiancy. Let us rather then leave our men
to sleep calmly under arms after the weariness of battle, while we
send, as I advise, whoe'er will volunteer, to spy upon the enemy;
and if they really are preparing to fly, let us arise and fall upon
the Argive host, but if this signalling is a trap to catch us, we
shall discover from the spy the enemy's designs and take our measures;
such is my advice, O King. 

CHORUS It likes me well; so change thy mind and adopt this counsel.
I love not hazardous commands in generals. What better scheme could
be than for a fleet spy to approach the ships and learn why our foes
are lighting fires in front of their naval station? 

HECTOR Since this finds favour with you all, prevail.  (To AENEAS)
Go thou and marshal our allies; mayhap the host hearing of our midnight
council is disturbed. Mine shall it be to send one forth to spy upon
the foe. And if I discover any plot amongst them, thou shalt fully
hear thereof, and at the council-board shalt learn our will; but in
case they be starting off in flight, with cager ear await the trumpet's
call, for then I will not stay, but will this very night engage the
Argive host there where their ships are hauled up. 

AENEAS Send out the spy forthwith; there's safety in thy counsels
now. And thou shalt find me steadfast at thy side, whene'er occasion
call.  (Exit AENEAS.)  

HECTOR What Trojan now af all our company doth volunteer to go and
spy the Argive fleet? Who will be that patriot? Who saith "I will"?
Myself cannot at every point serve my country and my friends in arms.

DOLON (Comes from the rear) I for my country will gladly run this
risk and go to spy the Argive fleet, and when I have learnt fully
all that the Acheans plot I will return. Hear the conditions on which
I undertake this toil. 

HECTOR True to his name in sooth, his country's friend is Dolon.
Thy father's house was famed of yore, but thou hast made it doubly
so. 

DOLON So must I toil, but for my pains a meet reward should I receive.
For set a price on any deed, and then and there it gives to it a double
grace. 

HECTOR Yea, that is but fair; I cannot gainsay it. Name any prize
for thyself save the sway I bear. 

DOLON I covet not thy toilsome sovereignty. 

HECTOR Well then, marry a daughter of Priam and become my good brother.

DOLON Nay, I care not to wed amongst those beyond my station.

HECTOR There's gold, if this thou'lt claim as thy guerdon.

DOLON Gold have I in my home; no sustenance lack I. 

HECTOR What then is thy desire of all that Ilium stores within her?

DOLON Promise me my gift when thou dost conquer the Achaeans.

HECTOR I will give it thee; do thou ask anything except the captains
of the fleet. 

DOLON Slay them; I do not ask thee to keep thy hand off Menelaus.

HECTOR Is it the son of Oileus thou wouldst ask me for?

DOLON Ill hands to dig and delve are those mid luxury nursed.

HECTOR Whom then of the Acheans wilt thou have alive to hold to ransom?

DOLON I told thee before, my house is stored with gold.

HECTOR Why then, thou shalt come and with thine own hands choose
out some spoil. 

DOLON Nail up the spoils for the gods on their temple walls.

HECTOR Prithee, what higher prize than these wilt ask me for?

DOLON Achilles' coursers. Needs must the prize be worth the toil
when one stakes one's life on Fortune's die. 

HECTOR Ah! but thy wishes clash with mine anent those steeds; for
of immortal stock, they and their sires before them, are those horses
that bear the son of Peleus on his headlong course. Them did king
Poseidon, ocean's god, break and give to Peleus, so runs the legend-yet,
for I did urge thee on, I will not break my word; to thee will I give
Achilles' team, to add a splendour to thy house. 

DOLON I thank thee; in receiving them I avow I am taking a fairer
gift than any other Phrygian for my bravery. Yet thee it needs not
to be envious; countless joys besides this will glad thy heart in
thy kingship o'er this land.  (Exit HECTOR.)  

CHORUS Great the enterprise, and great the boon thou designest to
receive. Happy, ay, happy wilt thou be, if thou succeed; fair the
fame thy toil shall win. Yet to wed with a prince's sister were a
distinction high. On Heaven's decrees let Justice keep her eye! what
man can give thou hast, it seems, in full. 

DOLON Now will I set forth, and going within my house will don such
garb as suits, and then will hasten to the Argive fleet.

CHORUS Why, what dress in place of this wilt thou assume?

DOLON Such as suits my task and furtive steps. 

CHORUS One should ever learn wisdom from the wise; tell me wherewith
thou wilt drape thy body. 

DOLON I will fasten a wolf skin about my back, and o'er my head put
the brute's gaping jaws; then fitting its fore-feet to my hands and
its hind-feet to my legs I will go on all-fours in imitation of its
gait to puzzle the enemy when I approach their trenches and barriers
round the ships. But whenever I come to a deserted spot, on two feet
will I walk; such is the ruse I have decided on. 

CHORUS May Hermes, Maia's child, escort thee safely there and back,
prince of tricksters as he is! Thou knowest what thou hast to do;
good luck is all thou needest now. 

DOLON I shall return in safety, and bring to thee the head of Odysseus
when I have slain him, or maybe the son of Tydeus, and with this clear
proof before thee thou shalt avow that Dolon went unto the Argive
fleet; for, ere the dawn appear, I will win back home with bloodstained
hand.  (Exit DOLON.)  

CHORUS O Apollo, blest godhead, lord of Thymbra and of Delos, who
hauntest thy fane in Lycia, come with all thy archery, appear this
night, and by thy guidance save our friend now setting forth, and
aid the Dardans' scheme, almighty god whose hands in days of yore
upreared Troy's walls! Good luck attend his mission to the ships!
may he reach the host of Hellas and spy it out, then turn again and
reach the altars of his father's home in Ilium! Grant him to mount
the chariot drawn by Phthia's steeds, when Hector, our master, hath
sacked Achae's camp, those steeds that the sea-god gave to Peleus,
son of Aeacus; for he and he alone had heart enough for home and country
to go and spy the naval station; his spirit I admire; how few stout
hearts there be, when on the sea the sunlight dies and the city labours
in the surge; Phrygia yet hath left a valiant few, and bold hearts
in the battle's press; 'tis only Mysia's sons who scorn us as allies.

Which of the Achaeans will their four-footed murderous foe slay in
their beds, as he crosses the ground, feigning to be a beast? May
he lay Menelaus low or slay Agamemnon and bring his head to Helen's
hands, causing her to lament her evil kinsman, who hath come against
my city, against the land of Troy with his countless host of ships.

DOLON reappears disguised and departs for the Greek camp.  (Enter
MESSENGER.)  

MESSENGER  (a Shepherd) . 
Great king, ever in days to come be it mine to bring my masters such
news as I am bearing now unto thine ears.  (Enter HECTOR.)

HECTOR Full oft the rustic mind is afflicted with dulness; so thou,
as like as not, art come to this ill-suited place to tell thy master
that his flocks are bearing well. Knowest thou not my palace or my
father's throne? Thither thou shouldst carry thy tale when thou hast
prospered with thy flocks. 

MESSENGER Dull herdsmen are; I do not gainsay thee. 
But none the less I bring thee joyful news. 

HECTOR A truce to thy tale of how the sheep-fold fares; I have battles
to fight and spears to wield. 

MESSENGER The very things of which I, too, came to tell thee; for
a chieftain of a countless host is on his way to join thee as thy
friend and to champion this land. 

HECTOR His country? and the home that he hath left? 

MESSENGER His country, Thrace: men call his father Strymon.

HECTOR Didst say that Rhesus was setting foot in 

MESSENGER Thou hast it; and savest me half my speech. 

HECTOR How is it that he comes to Ida's meadows, wandering from the
broad waggon track across the plain? 

MESSENGER I cannot say for certain, though I might guess. To make
his entry by night is no idle scheme, when he hears that the plains
are packed with foemen's troops. But he frightened us rustic hinds
who dwell alog the slopes of Ida, the earliest settlement in the land,
as he came by night through yon wood where wild beasts couch. On surged
the tide of Thracian warriors with loud shouts; whereat in wild amaze
we drove our flocks unto the heights, for fear that some Argives were
coming to plunder and harry thy steading, till that we caught the
sound of voices other than Greek and ceased from our alarm. Then went
I and questioned in the Thracian tongue those who were reconnoitring
the road, who it was that lead them, and whose he avowed him to be,
that came to the city to help the sons of Priam. And when I had heard
all I wished to learn, I stood still awhile; and lo! I see Rhesus
mounted like a god upon his Thracian chariot. Of gold was the yoke
that linked the necks of his steeds whiter than the snow; and on his
shoulders flashed his targe with figures welded in gold; while a gorgon
of bronze like that which gleams from the aegis of the goddess was
bound upon the frontlet of his horses, ringing out its note of fear
with many a bell. The number of his host thou couldst not reckon to
a sum exact, for it was beyond one's comprehension; many a knight
was there, and serried ranks of targeteers, and archers not a few,
with countless swarms of light-armed troops, in Thracian garb arrayed,
to bear them company. Such the ally who comes to Troy's assistance;
him the son of Peleus will ne'er escape or if he fly or meet him spear
to spear. 

CHORUS Whenso the gods stand by the burghers staunch and true, the
tide of fortune glides with easy flow to a successful goal.

HECTOR I shall find a host of friends now that fortune smiles upon
my warring and Zeus is on my side. But no need have we of those who
shared not our toils of erst, what time the War-god, driving all before
him, was rending the sails of our ship of state with his tempestuous
blast. Rhesus hath shewn the friendship he then bore to Troy; for
he cometh to the feast, albeit he was not with the hunters when they
took the prey, nor joined his spear with theirs. 

CHORUS Thou art right to scorn and blame such friends; yet welcome
those who fain would help the state. 

HECTOR Sufficient we who long have kept Ilium safe. 

CHORUS Art so sure thou hast already caught the foe? 

HECTOR Quite sure I am; to-morrow's light will make that plain.

CHORUS Beware of what may chance; full oft doth fortune veer.

HECTOR I loathe the friend who brings his help too late.

MESSENGER O prince, to turn away allies earns hatred. His mere appearing
would cause a panic amongst the foe. 

CHORUS Let him, at least, since he is come, approach thy genial board
as guest, if not ally, for the gratitude of Priam's sons is forfeit
in his case. 

HECTOR Thou counsellest aright; thou too dost take the proper view.
Let Rhesus in his gilded mail join the allies of this land, thanks
to the messenger's report.  (Exeunt the MESSENGER and HECTOR.)

CHORUS May Nemesis, daughter of Zeus, check the word that may offend;
for lo! I will utter all that my soul fain would say. Thou art come,
O son of the river god, art come, thrice welcome in thy advent, to
the halls of Phrygia; late in time thy Pierian mother and Strymon
thy sire, that stream with bridges fair, are sending thee to us-Strymon
who begat thee his strong young son, that day his swirling waters
found a refuge in the tuneful Muse's virgin bosom. Thou art my Zeus,
my god of light, as thou comest driving thy dappled steeds. Now, O
Phrygia, O my country, now mayst thou by God's grace address thy saviour
Zeus! Shall old Troy once more at last spend the live-long day in
drinking toasts and singing love's praise, while the wildering wine-cup
sends a friendly challenge round, as o'er the sea for Sparta bound,
the sons of Atreus quit the Ilian strand? Ah! best of friends, with
thy strong arm and spear mayst thou this service do me, then safe
return. Come, appear, brandish that shield of gold full in Achilles'
face; raise it aslant along the chariot's branching rail, urging on
thy steeds the while, and shaking thy lance with double point. For
none after facing thee will ever join the dance on the lawns of Argive
Hera; no, but he shall die by Thracians slain, and this land shall
bear the burden of his corpse and be glad.  (Enter RHESUS.)  Hail,
all bail O mighty prince! fair the scion thou hast bred, O Thrace,
a ruler in his every look. Mark his stalwart frame cased in golden
corslet! Hark to the ringing bells that peal so proudly from his targehandle
hung. A god, O Troy, a god, a very Ares, a scion of Strymon's stream
and of the tuneful Muse, breathes courage into thee.  (Re-enter HECTOR.)

RHESUS Brave son of sire as brave, Hector, prince of this land, all
haill After many a long day I greet thee. Right glad am I of thy success,
to see thee camped hard on the foemen's towers; I come to help thee
raze their walls and fire their fleet of ships. 

HECTOR Son of that tuneful mother, one of the Muses nine, and of
Thracian Strymon's stream, I ever love to speak plain truth; nature
gave me not a double tongue. Long, long ago shouldst thou have come
and shared the labours this land nor suffered Troy for any help of
thine to fall o'er thrown by hostile Argive spears. Thou canst not
say 'twas any want of invitation that kept thee from coming with thy
help to visit us. How oft came heralds and embassies from Phrygia
urgently requiring thine aid for our city? What sumptuous presents
did we not send to thee? But thou, brother barbarian though thou wert,
didst pledge away to Hellenes us thy barbarian brethren, for ill the
help thou gavest. Yet 'twas I with this strong arm that raised thee
from thy paltry princedom to high lordship over Thrace, that day I
fell upon the Thracian chieftains face to face around Pangaeus in
Paeonia's land and broke their serried ranks, and gave their people
up to thee with the yoke upon their necks; but thou hast trampled
on this great favour done thee, and comest with laggard step to give
thine aid when friends are in distress. While they, whom no natural
tic of kin constrains, have long been here, and some are dead and
in their graves beneath the heaped-up cairn, no mean proof of loyalty
to the city, and others in harness clad and mounted on their cars,
with steadfast soul endure the icy blast and parching heat of the
sun, not pledging one another, as thou art wont, in long deep draughts
on couches soft. This is the charge I bring against thee and utter
to thy face, that thou mayst know how frank is Hector's tongue.

RHESUS I too am such another as thyself; straight to the point I
cut my way; no shuffling nature mine. My heart was wrung with sorer
anguish than ever thine was at my absence from this land; I fumed
and chafed, but Scythian folk, whose borders march with mine, made
war on me on the very eve of my departure for Ilium; already had I
reached the strand of the Euxine sea, there to transport my Thracian
army. Then did my spear pour out o'er Scythia's soil great drops of
bloody rain, and Thrace too shared in the mingled slaughter. This
then was what did chance to keep me from coming to the land of Troy
and joining thy standard. But soon as I had conquered these and taken
their children as hostages and appointed the yearly tribute they should
pay my house, I crossed the firth, and lo! am here; on foot I traversed
all thy borders that remained to pass, not as thou in thy jeers at
those carousals of my countrymen hintest, nor sleeping soft in gilded
palaces, but amid the frozen hurricanes that vex the Thracian main
and the Paeonian shores, learning as I lay awake what suffering is,
this soldier's cloak-my only wrap. True my coming hath tarried, but
yet am I in time; ten long years already hast thou been at the fray,
and naught accomplished yet; day in, day out, thou riskest all in
this game of war with Argives. While I will be content once to see
the sungod rise, and sack yon towers and fall upon their anchored
fleet and slay the Achaeans; and on the morrow home from Ilium will
I go, at one stroke ending all thy toil. Let none of you lay hand
to spear to lift it, for I, for all my late arrival, will with my
lance make utter havoc of those vaunting Achaeans. 

CHORUS Joy, joy! sweet champion sent by Zeus! Only may Zeus, throned
on high, keep jealousy, resistless foe, from thee for thy presumptuous
words! Yon fleet of ships from Argos sent, never brought, nor formerly
nor now, among all its warriors a braver than thee; how I wonder will
Achilles, how will Aias stand the onset of thy spear? Oh! to live
to see that happy day, my prince, that thou mayest wreak vengeance
on them, gripping thy lance in thy deathdealing hand! 

RHESUS Such exploits am I ready to achieve to atone for my long absence;
(with due submission to Nemesis I say this;) then when we have cleared
this city of its foes and thou hast chosen out firstfruits for the
gods, I fain would march with thee against the Argives' country and
coming thither, lay Hellas waste with war, that they in turn may know
the taste of ill. 

HECTOR If thou couldst rid the city of this present curse and restore
it to its old security, sure I should feel deep gratitude towards
heaven. But as for sacking Argos and the pasture-lands of Hellas,
as thou sayest, 'tis no easy task. 

RHESUS Avow they not that hither came the choicest chiefs of Hellas?

HECTOR Aye, and I scorn them not; enough have I to do in driving
them away. 

RHESUS Well, if we slay these, our task is fully done. 

HECTOR Leave not the present need, nor look to distant schemes.

RHESUS Thou art, it seems, content to suffer tamely and make no return.

HECTOR I rule an empire wide enough, e'en though I here abide. But
on the left wing or the right or in the centre of the allies thou
mayst plant thy shield and marshal thy troops. 

RHESUS Alone will I face the foe, Hector. But if thou art ashamed,
after all thy previous toil, to have no share in firing their ships'
prows, place me face to face at least with Achilles and his host.

HECTOR 'Gainst him thou canst not range thy eager spear.

RHESUS Why, 'twas surely said he sailed to Ilium. 

HECTOR He sailed and is come hither; but he is wroth and takes no
part with the other chieftains in the fray. 

RHESUS Who next to him hath won a name in their host? 

HECTOR Aias and the son of Tydeus are, I take it, no whit his inferiors;
there is Odysseus too, a noisy knave to talk, but bold enough withal,
of all men he country. For he her image he made his a vagrant in a
beggar's garb, and loudly did he curse the Argives, sent as a spy
to Ilium; and then sneaked out again, when he had slain the sentinels
and warders at the gate. He is ever to be found lurking in ambush
about the altar of Thymbraean Apollo nigh the city. In him we have
a troublous pest to wrestle with. 

RHESUS No brave man deigns to his foe in secret, but to meet him
face to face. If I can catch this knave alive, who, as thou sayest,
skulks in stealthy ambuscade and plots his mischief, I will impale
him at the outlet of the gates and set him up for vultures of the
air to make their meal upon. This is the death he ought to die, pirate
and temple-robber that he is. 

HECTOR To your quarters now, for night draws on. For thee I will
myself point out a spot where thy host can watch this night apart
from our array. Our watchword is Phorbus, if haply there be need thereof;
hear and mark it well and tell it to the Thracian army. Ye must advance
in front of our ranks and keep a watchful guard, and so receive Dolon
who went to spy the ships, for he, if safe he is, is even now approaching
the camp of Troy.  (Exeunt HECTOR and RHESUS.)  

CHORUS Whose watch is it? who relieves me? night's earlier stars
are on the wane, and the seven Pleiads mount the sky; athwart the
firmament the eagle floats. Rouse ye, why delay? Up from your beds
to the watch! See ye not the moon's pale beam? Dawn is near, day is
coming, and lo! a star that heralds it. 

SEMI-CHORUS Who was told off to the first watch? 
The son of Mygdon, whom men call Coroebus. 
Who after him? 
The Paconian contingent roused the Cilicians; 
And the Mysians us. 
Is it not then high time we went and roused the Lycians for the fifth
watch, as the lot decided? 

CHORUS Hark! hark! a sound; 'tis the nightingale, that slew her child,
singing where she sits upon her bloodstained nest by Simois her piteous
plaint, sweet singer of the many trills; already along Ida's slopes
they are pasturing the flocks, and o'er the night I catch the shrill
pipe's note; sleep on my closing eyelids softly steals, the sweetest
sleep that comes at dawn to tired eyes. 

SEMI-CHORUS Why doth not our scout draw near, whom Hector sent to
spy the fleet? 

He is so long away, I have my fears. 
Is it possible he hath plunged into a hidden ambush and been slain?

Soon must we know. 
My counsel is we go and rouse the Lycians to the fifth watch, as the
lot ordained.  (Exit SEMI-CHORUS., Enter DIOMEDES and ODYSSEUS
cautiously with drawn swords.)  

ODYSSEUS Didst not hear, O Diomedes, the clash of arms? or is it
an idle noise that rings in my ears? 

DIOMEDES Nay, 'tis the rattle of steel harness on the chariot-rails;
me, too, did fear assail, till I perceived 'twas but the clang of
horses' chains. 

ODYSSEUS Beware thou stumble not upon the guard in the darkness.

DIOMEDES I will take good care how I advance even in this gloom.

ODYSSEUS If however thou shouldst rouse them, dost know their watchword?

DIOMEDES Yea, 'tis "Phorbus"; I heard Dolon use it.  (They enter
the tent, then return.)  

ODYSSEUS Ha! the foe I see have left this bivouac. 

DIOMEDES Yet Dolon surely said that here was Hector's couch, against
whom this sword of mine is drawn. 

ODYSSEUS What can it mean? Is his company withdrawn elsewhere?

DIOMEDES Perhaps to form some stratagem against us. 

ODYSSEUS Like enough, for Hector now is grown quite bold by reason
of his victory. 

DIOMEDES What then are we to do, Odysseus? we have not found our
man asleep; our hopes are dashed. 

ODYSSEUS Let us to the fleet with what speed we may. Some god, whiche'er
it be that gives him his good luck, is preserving him; 'gainst fate
we must not strive. 

DIOMEDES Well, we twain must go against Eneas or Paris, most hateful
of Phrygians, and withour swords cut off their heads. 

ODYSSEUS How, pray, in the darkness canst thou find them amid a hostile
army, and slay them without risk? 

DIOMEDES Yet 'twere base to go unto the Agrive ships if we have worked
the enemy no harm. 

ODYSSEUS What! no harm! Have we not slain Dolon who spied upon the
anchored fleet, and have we not his spoils safe here? Dost thou expect
to sack the entire camp? Be led by me, let us return; and good luck
go with us!  (ATHENA appears.)  

ATHENA Whither away from the Trojan ranks, with sorrow gnawing at
your hearts, because fortune granteth not you twain to slay Hector
or Paris? Have ye not heard that Rhesus is come to succour Troy in
no mean sort? If he survive this night until to-morrow's dawn, neither
Achilles nor Aias, stout spearman, can stay him from utterly destroying
the Argive fleet, razing its palisades and carrying the onslaught
of his lance far and wide within the gates; slay him, and all is thine;
let Hector's sleep alone, nor hope to leave him a weltering trunk,
for he shall find death at another hand. 

ODYSSEUS Queen Athena, 'tis the well-known accent of thy voice I
hear; for thou art ever at my side to help me in my toil. Tell us
where the warrior lies asleep, in what part of the barbarian army
he is stationed. 

ATHENA Here lies he close at hand, not marshalled with the other
troops, but outside the ranks hath Hector given him quarters, till
night gives place to day. And nigh him are tethered his white steeds
to his Thracian chariot, easy to see in the darkness; glossy white
are they like to the plumage of a river swan. Slay their master and
bear them off, a glorious prize to any home, for nowhere else in all
the world is such a splendid team to be found. 

ODYSSEUS Diomedes, either do thou slay the Thracian folk, or leave
that to me, while thy care must be the horses. 

DIOMEDES I will do the killing, and do thou look to the steeds. For
thou art well versed in clever tricks, and hast a ready wit. And 'tis
right to allot a man to the work he can best perform. 

ATHENA Lo! yonder I see Paris coming towards us; he hath heard maybe
from the guard a rumour vague that foes are near. 

DIOMEDES Are others with him or cometh he alone? 

ATHENA Alone; to Hector's couch he seems to wend his way, to announce
to him that spies are in the camp. 

DIOMEDES Ought not he to head the list of slain? 

ATHENA Thou canst not o'erreach Destiny. And it is not decreed that
he should fall by thy hand; but hasten on thy mission of slaughter
fore-ordained,  (exeunt ODYSSEUS and DIOMEDES)  while I feigning to
be Cypris, his ally, and to aid him in his efforts will answer thy
foe with cheating words. Thus much I have told you, but the fated
victim knoweth not, nor hath he heard one word, for all he is so near.
(Enter PARIS.)  

PARIS To thee I call, general and brother, Hector! Sleep'st thou?
shouldst not thou awake? Some foeman draws anigh our host, or thieves
maybe, or spies. 

ATHENA Courage! lo! Cypris watches o'er thee in gracious mood. Thy
warfare is my care, for I do not for the honour thou once didst me,
and I thank thee for thy good service. And now, when the host of Troy
is triumphant, am I come bringing to thee a powerful friend, the Thracian
child of the Muse, the heavenly songstress, whose father's name is
Strymon. 

PARIS Ever unto this city and to me a kind friend art thou, and I
am sure that decision I then made conferred upon this city the highest
treasure life affords in thy person. I heard a vague report, and so
I came, for there prevailed amongst the guard a rumour that Achaean
spies are here. One man, that saw them not, saith so, while another,
that saw them come, cannot describe them, and so I am on my way to
Hector's tent. 

ATHENA Fear naught; all is quiet in the host, and Hector is gone
to assign a sleeping-place to the Thracian army. 

PARIS Thou dost persuade me, and I believe thy words, and will go
to guard my post, free of fear. 

ATHENA Go, for 'tis my pleasure ever to watch thy interests, that
so I may see my allies prosperous. Yea, and thou too shalt recognize
my zeal.  (Exit PARIS., Enter ODYSSEUS and DIOMEDES.)  O son of
Laertes, I bid you sheathe your whetted swords, ye warriors all too
keen; for dead before you lies the Thracian chief, his steeds are
captured, but the foe have wind thereof, and are coming forth against
you; fly with all speed to the ships' station. Why delay to save your
lives when the foemen's storm is just bursting on you? 

CHORUS On, on! strike, strike, lay on, lay on! deal death in every
blow! 

SEMI-CHORUS Who goes there? 
Look you, that man I mean. There are the thieves who in the gloom
disturbed this host. Hither, come hither, every man of you! I have
them-I have clutched them fast. 

What is the watchword? Whence cam'st thou? Thy country? 

ODYSSEUS 'Tis not for thee to know. 

SEMI-CHORUS Speak, or thou diest as a vile traitor this day.

Wilt not the watchword declare, ere my sword finds its way to thy
heart? 

ODYSSEUS What! hast thou slain Rhesus? 

SEMI-CHORUS Nay, I am asking thee about him who came to slay us.

ODYSSEUS Be of good heart, approach. 

SEMI-CHORUS Strike every man of you, strike, strike home!

ODYSSEUS Stay every man of you! 

SEMI-CHORUS No, no, lay on! 

ODYSSEUS Ah! slay not a friend. 

SEMI-CHORUS What is the watchword, then? 

ODYSSEUS Phoebus. 

SEMI-CHORUS Right! stay every man his spear! Dost know whither those
men are gone? 

ODYSSEUS Somewhere here I caught a sight of them. 

SEMI-CHORUS Close on their track each man of you, or else must we
shout for aid. 

ODYSSEUS Nay, 'twere conduct strange to disturb our friends with
wild alarms by night.  (Exeunt ODYSSEUS and DIOMEDES.)  

CHORUS Who was that man who slipped away? Who was he that will loudly
boast his daring in escaping me? How shall I catch him now? to whom
liken him? the man who came by night with fearless step passing through
our ranks and the guard we set. Is he a Thessalian or a dweller in
some seacoast town of Locris, or hath he his home amid the scattered
islands of the main? Who was he, and whence came he? What is his fatherland?
What god doth he avow as lord of the rest? 

SEMI-CHORUS Whose work is this? is it the deed of Odysseus?

If one may conjecture from his former acts, of course it is.

Dost think so really? Why, of course. 
He is a bold foe for us. 
Who is? whom art thou praising for valiancy? 
Odysseus. 
Praise not the crafty weapons that a robber uses. 

CHORUS Once before he came into this city, with swimming bleary eyes,
in rags and tatters clad, his sword hidden in his cloak. And like
some vagrant menial he slunk about begging his board, his hair all
tousled and matted with filth, and many a bitter curse he uttered
against the royal house of the Atreidae, as though forsooth he were
to those chiefs opposed. Would, oh! Would, oh! would he had perished,
as was his due, or ever he set foot on Phrygia's soil! 

SEMI-CHORUS Whether it were really Odysseus or not, I am afeard.

Aye surely, for Hector will blame us sentinels. 
What can he allege? 
He will suspect. 
What have we done? why art afeard? 
By us did pass- 
Well, who? 
They who this night came to the Phrygian host.  (Enter CHARIOTEER.)

CHARIOTEER O crue! stroke of fate. Woe, woe! 

CHORUS Hush! be silent all! Crouch low, for maybe there cometh someone
into the snare. 

CHARIOTEER Oh, oh! dire mishap to the Thracian allies. 

CHORUS Who is he that groans? 

CHARIOTEER Alack, alack! Woe is me and woe is thee, O king of thrace!
How curst the sight of Troy to thee! how sad the blow that closed
thy life! 

CHORUS Who art thou? an ally? which? night's gloom hath dulled these
eyes, I cannot clearly recognize thee. 

CHARIOTEER Where can I find some Trojan chief? Where doth Hector
take his rest under arms? Alack and well-a-day! To which of the captains
of the host am I to tell my tale? What sufferings ours! What dark
deeds someone hath wrought on us and gone his way, when he had wound
up a clew of sorrow manifest to every Thracian! 

CHORUS From what I gather of this man's words, some calamity, it
seems, is befalling the Thracian host. 

CHARIOTEER Lost is all our host, our prince is dead, slain by a treacherous
blow. Woe worth the hour! woe worth the day! O the cruel anguish of
this bloody wound that inly racks my frame! Would I were dead! Was
it to die this inglorious death that Rhesus and I did come to Troy?

CHORUS This is plain language; in no riddles he declares the disaster;
all too clearly he asserts our friends' destruction. 

CHARIOTEER A sorry deed it was, and more than that a deed most foul;
yea, 'tis an evil doubly bad; to die with glory, if die one must,
is bitterness enough I trow to him who dies; assuredly it is; though
to the living it add dignity and honour for their house. But we, like
fools, have died a death of shame. No sooner had great Hector given
us our quarters and told us the watchword than we laid us down to
sleep upon the ground, o'ercome by weariness. No guard our army set
to watch by night. Our arms we set not in array, nor were the whips
hung ready on the horses' yokes, for our prince was told that you
were masters now, and had encamped hard on their ships; so carelessly
we threw us down to sleep. Now I with thoughtful mind awoke from my
slumber, and with ungrudging hand did measure out the horses' feed,
expecting to harness them at dawn unto the fray; when lo! through
the thick gloom two men I see roaming around our army. But when I
roused myself they fled away, and were gone once more; and I called
out to them to keep away from our army, for I thought they might be
thieves from our allies. No answer made they, so I too said no more,
but came back to my couch and slept again. And lo! as I slept came
a strange fancy o'er me: I saw, methought as in a dream, those steeds
that I had groomed and used to drive, stationed at Rhesus' side, with
wolves mounted on their backs; and these with their tails did lash
the horses' flanks and urge them on, while they did snort and breathe
fury from their nostrils, striving in terror to unseat their riders.
Up I sprang to defend the horses from the brutes, for the horror of
the night scared me. Then as I raised my head I heard the groans of
dying men, and a warm stream of new-shed blood bespattered me where
I lay close to my murdered master as he gave up the ghost. To my feet
I start, but all unarmed; and as I peer about and grope to find my
sword, a stalwart hand from somewhere nigh dealt me a sword-thrust
beneath the ribs. I know the sword that dealt that blow from the deep
gaping wound it gave me. Down on my face I fell, while they fled clean
away with steeds and chariot. Alack, alack! Tortured with pain, too
weak to stand, a piteous object I know what happened, for I saw it;
but how the victims met their death I cannot say, nor whose the hand
that smote them; but I can well surmise we have our friends to thank
for this mischance. 

CHORUS O charioteer of Thrace's hapless king, never suspect that
any but foes have had a hand in this. Lo! Hector himself is here,
apprized of thy mischance; he sympathizes as he should with thy hard
fate.  (Enter HECTOR.)  

HECTOR Ye villains who have caused this mischief dire, how came the
foemen's spies without your knowledge, to your shame, and spread destruction
through the host, and you drove them not away as they passed in or
out? Who but you shall pay the penalty for this? You, I say, were
stationed here to the host. But they are gone without a wound, with
many a scoff at Phrygian cowardice, and at me their leader. Now mark
ye this-by father Zeus I swear at least the scourge, if not the headsman's
axe, awaits such conduct; else count Hector a thing of naught, a mere
coward. 

CHORUS Woe, woe is me! A grievous, grievous woe came on me, I can
see, great lord of my city, in the hour that I brought my news to
thee that the Argive host was kindling fires about the ships; for
by the springs of Simois I vow my eye kept sleepless watch by night,
nor did I slumber or sleep. O be not angered with me, my lord; I am
guiltless of all; yet if hereafter thou find that I in word or deed
have done amiss, bury me alive beneath the earth; I ask no mercy.

CHARIOTEER Why threaten these? Why try to undermine my poor barbarian
wit by crafty words, barbarian thou thyself? Thou didst this deed;
nor they who have suffered ail, nor we by wounds disabled will believe
it was any other. A long and subtle speech thou'lt need to prove to
me thou didst not slay thy friends because thou didst covet the horses,
and to gain them didst murder thine own allies, after bidding them
come so straitly. They came, and they are dead. Why, Paris found more
decent means to shame the rights of hospitality than thou, with thy
slaughter of thy allies. Never tell me some Argive came and slaughtered
us. Who could have passed the Trojan lines and come against us without
detection? Thou and thy Phrygian troops were camped in front of us.
Who was wounded, who was slain amongst thy friends, when that foe
thou speak'st of came? 'Twas we were wounded, while some have met
a sterner fate and said farewell to heaven's light. Briefly, then,
no Achaean do I blame. For what enemy could have come and found the
lowly bed of Rhesus in the dark, unless some deity were guiding the
murderers' steps? They did not so much as know of his arrival. No,
'tis thy plot this! 

HECTOR 'Tis many a long year now since I have had to do with allies,
aye, ever since Achoea's host settled in this land, and never an ill
word have I known them say of me; but with thee I am to make a beginning.
Never may such longing for horses seize me that I should slay my friends!
This is the work of Odysseus. Who of all the Argives but he would
have devised or carried out such a deed? I fear him much; and somewhat
my mind misgives me lest he have met and slain Dolon as well; for
'tis long since he set out, nor yet appears. 

CHARIOTEER I know not this Odysseus of whom thou speakest. 'Twas
no foe's hand that smote me. 

HECTOR Well, keep that opinion for thyself, if it please thee.

CHARIOTEER O land of my fathers, would I might die in thee!

HECTOR Die! No! Enough are those already dead. 

CHARIOTEER Where am I to turn, I ask thee, reft of my master now?

HECTOR My house shall shelter thee and cure thee of thy hurt.

CHARIOTEER How shall murderers' hands care for me? 

HECTOR This fellow will never have done repeating the same story.

CHARIOTEER Curses on the doer of this deed! On thee my tongue doth
fix no charge, as thou complainest; but justice is over all.

HECTOR Ho! him hence! Carry him to my palace and tend him carefully,
that he may have no fault to find. And you must go to those upon the
walls, to Priam and his aged councillors, and tell them to give orders
for the burial of the dead at the place where folk turn from the road
to rest.  (CHARIOTEER is carried off.)  

CHORUS Why, with what intent doth fortune change and bring Troy once
again to mourning after her famous victory? See, see! O look! What
goddess, O king, is hovering o'er our heads, bearing in her hands
as on a bier the warrior slain but now? I shudder at this sight of
woe.  (THE MUSE appears.)  

THE MUSE Behold me, sons of Troy! Lo! I the Muse, one of the sisters
nine, that have honour among the wise, am here, having seen the piteous
death his foes have dealt my darling son. Yet shall the crafty Odysseus,
that slew him, one day hereafter pay a fitting penalty. O my son,
thy mother's grief, I mourn for thee in self-taught strains of woe!
What a journey thou didst make to Troy, a very path of woe and sorrow!
starting, spite of all my warnings and thy father's earnest prayers,
in defiance of us. Woe is me for thee, my dear, dear son! Ah, woe!
my son, my son! 

CHORUS I, too, bewail and mourn thy son, as far as one can who hath
no common tie of kin. 

THE MUSE Curses on the son of Oeneus! Curses on Laertes' child! who
hath reft me of my fair son and made me childless! and on that woman,
too, that left her home in Hellas, and sailed hither with her Phrygian
paramour, bringing death to thee, my dearest son, 'neath Ilium's walls,
and stripping countless cities of their heroes brave. Deep, deep the
wounds, son of Philammon, hast thou inflicted on my heart, in life,
nor less in Hades' halls. Yea, for 'twas thy pride, thy own undoing,
and thy rivalry with us Muses that made me mother of this poor son
of mine. For as I crossed the river's streams I came too nigh to Strymon's
fruitful couch, that day we Muses came unto the brow of Mount Pangaeus
with its soil of gold, with all our music furnished forth for one
great trial of minstrel skill with that clever Thracian bard, and
him we reft of sight, even Thamyris, the man who oft reviled our craft.
Anon, when I gave birth to thee, because I felt shame of my sisters
and my maiden years, I sent thee to the swirling stream of thy sire,
the water-god; and Strymon did not entrust thy nurture to mortal hands,
but to the fountain nymphs. There wert thou reared most fairly by
the maiden nymphs, and didst rule o'er Thrace, a leader amongst men,
my child. So long as thou didst range thy native land in quest of
bloody deeds of prowess I feared not for thy death, but I bade thee
ne'er set out for Troy-town, for well I knew thy doom; but Hector's
messages and those countless embassies urged thee to go and help thy
friends. This was thy doing, Athena; thou alone art to blame for his
death (neither Odysseus nor the son of Tydeus had aught to do with
it); think not it hath escaped mine eye. And yet we sister Muses do
special honour to thy city, thy land we chiefly haunt; yea, and Orpheus,
own cousin of the dead whom thou hast slain, did for thee unfold those
dark mysteries with their torch processions. Musaeus, too, thy holy
citizen, of all men most advanced in lore, him did Phoebus with us
sisters train. And here is my reward for this; dead in my arms I hold
my child and mourn for him. Henceforth no other learned man I'll bring
to thee. 

CHORUS Vainly it seems the Thracian charioteer reviled us with plotting
this man's murder, Hector. 

HECTOR I knew it; it needed no seer to say that he had perished by
the arts of Odysseus. Now I, when I saw the Hellene host camped in
my land, of course would not hesitate to send heralds to my friends,
bidding them come and help my country; and so I sent, and he as in
duty bound came my toils to share. It grieves me sorely to see him
dead; and now am I ready to raise a tomb for him and burn at his pyre
great store of fine raiment; for he came as a friend and in sorrow
is he going hence. 

THE MUSE He shall not descend into earth's darksome soil; so earnest
a prayer will I address to the bride of the nether world, the daughter
of the goddess Demeter, giver of increase, to release his soul, and
debtor, as she is to me, show that she honours the friends of Orpheus.
Yet from henceforth will he be to me as one dead that seeth not the
light; for never again will he meet me or see his mother's face, but
will lurk hidden in a cavern of the land with veins of silver, restored
to life, no longer man but god, even as the prophet of Bacchus did
dwell in a grotto 'neath Pangaeus, a god whom his votaries honoured.
Lightly now shall I feel the grief of the sea-goddess, for her son
too must die. First then for thee we sisters must chaunt our dirge,
and then for Achilles when Thetis mourns some day. Him shall not Pallas,
thy slayer, save; so true the shaft Loxias keeps in his quiver for
him. Ah me! the sorrows that a mother feels! the troubles of mortals!
whoso fairly reckons you up will live and die a childless man and
will have no children to bury.  (THE MUSE disappears.)  

CHORUS His mother now must see to this her son's burial; but for
thee, Hector, if thou wilt carry out any scheme, now is the time,
for day is dawning. 

HECTOR Go, bid our comrades arm at once; yoke the horses; torch in
hand ye must await the blast of the Etrurian trumpet; for I hope with
this day's mounting sun to pass beyond their lines and walls and fire
ships of the Acheans, restoring freedom's light once more to Troy.

CHORUS Obedience to our prince! let us array ourselves in mail, and
go forth and these orders tell to our allies, and haply the god who
is on our side will grant us victory. 

THEEND
 ----------------------------------------------------------------------

Before the temple of Demeter at Eleusis. On the steps of the great
altar is seated AETHRA. Around her, in the garb of suppliants, is
the CHORUS OF ARGIVE MOTHERS. ADRASTUS lies on the ground before the
altar, crushed in abject grief. The CHILDREN of the slain chieftains
stand nearby. Around the altar are the attendants of the
goddess.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

AETHRA O Demeter, guardian of this Eleusinian land, and ye servants
of the goddess who attend her fane, grant happiness to me and my son
Theseus, to the city of Athens and the country of Pittheus, wherein
my father reared me, Aethra, in a happy home, and gave me in marriage
to Aegeus, Pandion's son, according to the oracle of Loxias. This
prayer I make, when I behold these aged dames, who, leaving their
homes in Argos, now throw themselves with suppliant branches at my
knees in their awful trouble; for around the gates of Cadmus have
they lost their seven noble sons, whom on a day Adrastus, king of
Argos, led thither, eager to secure for exiled Polyneices, his son-in-law,
a share in the heritage of Oedipus; so now their mothers would bury
in the grave the dead, whom the spear hath slain, but the victors
prevent them and will not allow them to take up the corpses, spurning
Heaven's laws. Here lies Adrastus on the ground with streaming eye,
sharing with them the burden of their prayer to me, and bemoaning
the havoc of the sword and the sorry fate of the warriors whom he
led from their homes. And he doth urge me use entreaty, to persuade
my son to take up the dead and help to bury them, either by winning
words or force of arms, laying on my son and on Athens this task alone.
Now it chanced, that I had left my house and come to offer sacrifice
on behalf of the earth's crop at this shrine, where first the fruitful
corn showed its bristling shocks above the soil. And here at the holy
altars of the twain goddesses, Demeter and her daughter, I wait, holding
these sprays of foliage, a bond that bindeth not, in compassion for
these childless mothers, hoary with age, and from reverence for the
sacred fillets. To call Theseus hither is my herald to the city gone,
that he may rid the land of that which grieveth them, or loose these
my suppliant bonds, with pious observance of the gods' will; for such
as are discreet amongst women should in all cases invoke the aid of
men. 

CHORUS  (chanting, strophe 1)

At thy knees I fall, aged dame, and my old lips beseech thee; arise,
rescue from the slain my children's bodies, whose limbs, by death
relaxed, are left a prey to savage mountain beasts, 

(antistrophe 1)

Beholding the bitter tears which spring to my eyes and my old wrinkled
skin torn by my hands; for what can I do else? who never laid out
my children dead within my halls, nor now behold their tombs heaped
up with earth. 

(strophe 2)

Thou too, honoured lady, once a son didst bear, crowning thy lord's
marriage with fond joy; then share, O share with me thy mother's feelings,
in such measure as my sad heart grieves for my own dead sons; and
persuade thy son, whose aid we implore, to go unto the river Ismenus,
there to place within my hapless arms the bodies of my children, slain
in their prime and left without a tomb. 

(antistrophe 2)

Though not as piety enjoins, yet from sheer necessity I have come
to the fire-crowned altars of the gods, falling on my knees with instant
supplication, for my cause is just, and 'tis in thy power, blest as
thou art in thy children, to remove from me my woe; so in my sore
distress I do beseech thee of my misery place in my hands my son's
dead body, that I may throw my arms about his hapless limbs.  (The
attendants of the goddess take up the lament., strophe 3)

Behold a rivalry in sorrow! woe takes up the tale of woe; hark! thy
servants beat their breasts. Come ye who join the mourners' wail,
come, O sympathetic band, to join the dance, which Hades honours;
let the pearly nail be stained red, as it rends your cheeks, let your
skin be streaked with gore; for honours rendered to the dead are credit
to the living. 

(antistrophe 3)

Sorrow's charm doth drive me wild, insatiate, painful, endless, even
as the trickling stream that gushes from some steep rock's face; for
'tis woman's way to fall a-weeping o'er the cruel calamity of children
dead. Ah me! would I could die and forget my anguish  (THESEUS and
his retinue enter.)  

THESEUS What is this lamentation that I hear, this beating of the
breast, these dirges for the dead, with cries that echo from this
shrine? How fluttering fear disquiets me, lest haply my mother have
gotted some mischance, in quest of whom I come, for she hath been
long absent from home. Ha! what now? A strange sight challenges my
speech; I see my aged mother sitting at the altar and stranger dames
are with her, who in various note proclaim their woe; from aged eyes
the piteous tear is starting to the ground, their hair is shorn, their
robes are not the robes of joy. What means it, mother? 'Tis thine
to make it plain to me, mine to listen; yea, for I expect some tidings
strange. 

AETHRA My son, these are the mothers of those chieftains seven, who
fell around the gates of Cadmus' town. With suppliant boughs they
keep me prisoner, as thou seest, in their midst. 

THESEUS And who is yonder man, that moaneth piteously in the gateway?

AETHRA Adrastus, they inform me, king of Argos. 

THESEUS Are those his children, those boys who stand round him?

AETHRA Not his, but the sons of the fallen slain. 

THESEUS Why are they come to us, with suppliant hand outstretched?

AETHRA I know; but 'tis for them to tell their story, my son.

THESEUS To thee, in thy mantle muffled, I address my inquiries; thy
head, let lamentation be, and speak; for naught can be achieved save
through the utterance of thy tongue. 

ADRASTUS  (rising) Victorious prince of the Athenian realm, Theseus,
to thee and to thy city I, a suppliant, come. 

THESEUS What seekest thou? What need is thine? 

ADRASTUS Dost know how I did lead an expedition to its ruin?

THESEUS Assuredly; thou didst not pass through Hellas, all in silence.

ADRASTUS There I lost the pick of Argos' sons. 

THESEUS These are the results of that unhappy war. 

ADRASTUS I went and craved their bodies from Thebes. 

THESEUS Didst thou rely on heralds, Hermes' servants, in order to
bury them? 

ADRASTUS I did; and even then their slayers said me nay.

THESEUS Why, what say they to thy just request? 

ADRASTUS Say! Success makes them forget how to bear their fortune.

THESEUS Art come to me then for counsel? or wherefore? 

ADRASTUS With the wish that thou, O Theseus, shouldst recover the
sons of the Argives. 

THESEUS Where is your Argos now? were its vauntings all in vain?

ADRASTUS Defeat and ruin are our lot. To thee for aid we come.

THESEUS Is this thy own private resolve, or the wish of all the city?

ADRASTUS The sons of Danaus, one and all, implore thee to bury the
dead. 

THESEUS Why didst lead thy seven armies against Thebes?

ADRASTUS To confer that favour on the husbands of my daughters twain.

THESEUS To which of the Argives didst thou give thy daughters in
marriage? 

ADRASTUS I made no match for them with kinsmen of my family.

THESEUS What! didst give Argive maids to foreign lords?

ADRASTUS Yea, to Tydeus, and to Polyneices, who was Theban-born

THESEUS What induced thee to select this alliance? 

ADRASTUS Dark riddles of Phoebus stole away my judgment.

THESEUS What said Apollo to determine the maidens' marriage?

ADRASTUS That I should give my daughters twain to a wild boar and
a lion. 

THESEUS How dost thou explain the message of the god? 

ADRASTUS One night came to my door two exiles. 

THESEUS The name of each declare: thou art speaking of both together.

ADRASTUS They fought together, Tydeus with Polyneices. 

THESEUS Didst thou give thy daughters to them as to wild beasts?

ADRASTUS Yea, for, as they fought, I likened them to those monsters
twain. 

THESEUS Why had they left the borders of their native land and come
to thee? 

ADRASTUS Tydeus was exiled for the murder of a kinsman.

THESEUS Wherefore had the son of Oedipus left Thebes? 

ADRASTUS By reason of his father's curse, not to spill his brother's
blood. 

THESEUS Wise no doubt that voluntary exile. 

ADRASTUS But those who stayed at home were for injuring the absent.

THESEUS What! did brother rob brother of his inheritance?

ADRASTUS To avenge this I set out; hence my ruin. 

THESEUS Didst consult seers, and gaze into the flame of burnt-offerings?

ADRASTUS Ah me! thou pressest on the very point wherein I most did
fail. 

THESEUS It seems thy going was not favoured by heaven. 

ADRASTUS Worse; I went in spite even of Amphiaraus. 

THESEUS And so heaven lightly turned its face from thee.

ADRASTUS I was carried away by the clamour of younger men.

THESEUS Thou didst favour courage instead of discretion.

ADRASTUS True; and many a general owes defeat to that. O king of
Athens, bravest of the sons of Hellas, I blush to throw myself upon
the ground and clasp thy knees, I a grey-haired king, blest in days
gone by; yet needs must yield to my misfortunes. I pray thee save
the dead; have pity on my sorrows and on these, the mothers of the
slain, whom hoary eld finds reft of their sons; yet they endured to
journey hither and tread a foreign soil with aged tottering steps,
bearing no embassy to Demeter's mysteries; only seeking burial for
their dead, which lot should have been theirs, e'en burial by the
hands of sons still in their prime. And 'tis wise in the rich to see
the poor man's poverty, and in the poor man to turn ambitious eyes
toward the rich, that so he may himself indulge a longing for possessions;
and they, whom fortune frowns not on, should gaze on misery's presentment;
likewise, who maketh songs should take a pleasure in their making;
for if it be not so with him, he will in no wise avail to gladden
others, if himself have sorrow in his home; nay, 'tis not even right
to expect it. Mayhap thou'lt say, "Why pass the land of Pelops o'er,
and lay this toil on Athens?" This am I bound to declare. Sparta is
cruel, her customs variable; the other states are small and weak.
Thy city alone would be able to undertake this labour; for it turns
an eye on suffering, and hath in thee a young and gallant king, for
want whereof to lead their hosts states ere now have often perished.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS I too, Theseus, urge the same plea to thee;
have pity on my hard fate. 

THESEUS Full oft have I argued out this subject with others. For
there are who say, there is more bad than good in human nature, to
the which I hold contrary view, that good o'er bad predominates in
man, for if it were not so, we should not exist. He hath my praise,
whoe'er of gods brought us to live by rule from chaos and from brutishness,
first by implanting reason, and next by giving us a tongue to declare
our thoughts, so as to know the meaning of what is said, bestowing
fruitful crops, and drops of rain from heaven to make them grow, wherewith
to nourish earth's fruits and to water her lap; and more than this,
protection from the wintry storm, and means to ward from us the sun-god's
scorching heat; the art of sailing o'er the sea, so that we might
exchange with one another whatso our countries lack. And where sight
fails us and our knowledge is not sure, the seer foretells by gazing
on the flame, by reading signs in folds of entrails, or by divination
from the flight of birds. Are we not then to proud, when heaven hath
made such preparation for our life, not to be content therewith? But
our presumption seeks to lord it over heaven, and in the pride of
our hearts we think we are wiser than the gods. Methinks thou art
even of this number, a son of folly, seeing that thou, though obedient
to Apollo's oracle in giving thy daughters to strangers, as if gods
really existed, yet hast hurt thy house by mingling the stream of
its pure line with muddy waters; no! never should the wise man have
joined the stock of just and unjust in one, but should have gotten
prosperous friends for his family. For the deity, confusing their
destinies, doth oft destroy by the sinner's fate him who never sinned
nor committed injustice. Thou didst lead all Argos forth to battle,
though seers proclaimed the will of heaven, and then in scorn of them
and in violent disregard of the gods hast ruined thy city, led away
by younger men, such as court distinction, and add war to war unrighteously,
destroying their fellow-citizens; one aspires to lead an army; another
fain would seize the reins of power and work his wanton will; a third
is bent on gain, careless of any ill the people thereby suffer. For
there are three ranks of citizens; the rich, a useless set, that ever
crave for more; the poor and destitute, fearful folk, that cherish
envy more than is right, and shoot out grievous stings against the
men who have aught, beguiled as they are by the eloquence of vicious
leaders; while the class that is midmost of the three preserveth cities,
observing such order as the state ordains. Shall I then become thy
ally? What fair pretext should I urge before my countrymen? Depart
in peace! For why shouldst thou, having been ill-advised thyself,
seek to drag our fortune down? 

LEADER He erred; but with the young men rests this error, while he
may well be pardoned. 

ADRASTUS I did not choose thee, king, to judge my affliction, but
came to thee to cure it; no! nor if in aught my fortunes prove me
wrong, came I to the to punish or correct them, but to seek thy help.
But if thou wilt not, must be content with thy decision; for how can
I help it? Come, aged dames, away! Yet leave behind you here the woven
leaves of pale green foliage, calling to witness heaven and earth,
Demeter, that fire-bearing goddess, and the sun-god's light, that
our prayers to heaven availed us naught. 

CHORUS  (singing) ...who was Pelops' son, and we are of the land
of Pelops and share with thee the blood of ancestors. What art thou
doing? wilt thou betray these suppliant symbols, and banish from thy
land these aged women without the boon they should obtain? Do not
so; e'en the wild beast finds a refuge in the rock, the slave in the
altars of the gods, and a state when tempest-tossed cowers to its
neighbour's shelter; for naught in this life of man is blest unto
its end. 

Rise, hapless one, from the sacred floor of Persephone; rise, clasp
him by the knees and implore him, "O recover the bodies of our dead
sons, the children that I lost-ah, woe is me!-beneath the walls of
Cadmus' town." Ah me! ah me! Take me by the hand, poor aged sufferer
that I am, support and guide and raise me up. By thy beard, kind friend,
glory of Hellas, I do beseech thee, as I clasp thy knees and hands
in my misery; O pity me as I entreat for my sons with my tale of wretched
woe, like some beggar; nor let my sons lie there unburied in the land
of Cadmus, glad prey for beasts, whilst thou art in thy prime, I implore
thee. See the teardrop tremble in my eye, as thus I throw me at thy
knees to win my children burial. 

THESEUS Mother mine, why weepest thou, drawing o'er thine eyes thy
veil? Is it because thou didst hear their piteous lamentations? To
my own heart it goes. Raise thy silvered head, weep not where thou
sittest at the holy altar of Demeter. 

AETHRA Ah woe! 

THESEUS 'Tis not for thee their sorrows to lament. 

AETHRA Ye hapless dames! 

THESEUS Thou art not of their company. 

AETHRA May I a scheme declare, my son, that shall add to thy glory
and the state's? 

THESEUS Yea, for oft even from women's lips issue wise counsels.

AETHRA Yet the word, that lurks within my heart, makes me hesitate.

THESEUS Shame! to hide from friends good counsel. 

AETHRA Nay then, I will not hold my peace to blame myself hereafter
for having now kept silence to my shame, nor will I forego my honourable
proposal, from the common fear that it is useless for women to give
good advice. First, my son, I exhort thee give good heed to heaven's
will, lest from slighting it thou suffer shipwreck; for in this one
single point thou failest, though well-advised in all else. Further,
I would have patiently endured, had it not been my duty to venture
somewhat for injured folk; and this, my son, it is that brings thee
now thy honour, and causes me no fear to urge that thou shouldst use
thy power to make men of violence, who prevent the dead from receiving
their meed of burial and funeral rites, perform this bounden duty,
and check those who would confound the customs of all Hellas; for
this it is that holds men's states together,-strict observance of
the laws. And some, no doubt, will say, 'twas cowardice made thee
stand aloof in terror, when thou mightest have won for thy city a
crown of glory, and, though thou didst encounter a savage swine, labouring
for a sorry task, yet when the time came for thee to face the helmet
and pointed spear, and do thy best, thou wert found to be coward.
Nay! do not so if thou be son of mine. Dost see how fiercely thy country
looks on its revilers when they mock her for want of counsel? Yea,
for in her toils she groweth greater. But states, whose policy is
dark and cautious, have their sight darkened by their carefulness.
My son, wilt thou not go succour the dead and these poor women in
their need? have no fears for thee, starting as thou dost with right
upon thy side; and although I see the prosperity of Cadmus' folk,
still am I confident they will throw a different die; for the deity
reverses all things again. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Ah! best of friends, right well hast thou pleaded
for me and for Adrastus, and hence my joy is doubled. 

THESEUS Mother, the words that I have spoken are his fair deserts,
and I have declared my opinion of the counsels that ruined him; yet
do I perceive the truth of thy warning to me, that it ill suits my
character to shun dangers. For by a long and glorious career have
I displayed this my habit among Hellenes, of ever punishing the wicked.
Wherefore I cannot refuse toil. For what will spiteful tongues say
of me, when thou, my mother, who more than all others fearest for
my safety, bidst me undertake this enterprise? Yea, I will go about
this business and rescue the dead by words persuasive; or, failing
that, the spear forthwith shall decide this issue, nor will heaven
grudge me this. But I require the whole city's sanction also, which
my mere wish will ensure; still by communicating the proposal to them
I shall find the people better disposed. For them I made supreme,
when I set this city free, by giving all an equal vote. So I will
take Adrastus as a text for what I have to say and go to their assembly,
and when have won them to these views, I will return hither, after
collecting a picked band of young Athenians; and then remaining under
arms I will send a message to Creon, begging the bodies of the dead.
But do ye, aged ladies, remove from my mother your holy wreaths, that
I may take her by the hand and conduct her to the house of Aegeus;
for a wretched son is he who rewards not his parents by service; for,
when he hath conferred on them the best he hath, he in his turn from
his own sons receives all such service as he gave to them.  (AETHRA
leaves the altar and departs.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

O Argos, home of steeds, my native land! ye have heard with your
ears these words, the king's pious will toward the gods in the sight
of great Pelasgia and throughout Argos. 

(antistrophe 1)

May he reach the goal! yea, and triumph o'er my sorrows, rescuing
the gory corpse, the mother's idol and making the land of Inachus
his friend by helping her. 

(strophe 2)

For pious toil is a fair ornament to cities, and carries with it
grace that never wastes away. What will the city decide, I wonder?
Will it conclude a friendly truce with me, and shall we obtain burial
for our sons? 

(antistrophe 2)

Help, O help, city of Pallas, the mother's cause, that so they may
not pollute the laws of all mankind. Thou, I know, dost reverence
right, and to injustice dealest out defeat, a protection at all times
to the afflicted.  (THESEUS addresses one of his own heralds. As he
speaks, the HERALD from King Creon of Thebes enters.)  

THESEUS Forasmuch as with this thy art thou hast ever served the
state and me by carrying my proclamations far and wide, so now cross
Asopus and the waters of Ismenus, and declare this message to the
haughty king of the Cadmeans: "Theseus, thy neighbour, one who well
may win the boon he craves, begs as a favour thy permission to bury
the dead, winning to thyself thereby the love of all the Erechtheidae."
And if they will acquiesce, come back again, but if they hearken not,
thy second message runneth thus, they may expect my warrior host;
for at the sacred fount of Callichorus my army camps in readiness
and is being reviewed. Moreover, the city gladly of its own accord
undertook this enterprise, when it perceived my wish. Ha! who comes
hither to interrupt my speech? A Theban herald, so it seems, though
I am not sure thereof. Stay; haply he may save the thy trouble. For
by his coming he meets my purpose half-way. 

THEBAN HERALD Who is the despot of this land? To whom must I announce
the message of Creon, who rules o'er the land of Cadmus, since Eteocles
was slain by the hand of his brother Polyneices, at the sevenfold
gates of Thebes? 

THESEUS Sir stranger, thou hast made a false beginning to thy speech,
in seeking here a despot. For this city is not ruled by one man, but
is free. The people rule in succession year by year, allowing no preference
to wealth, but the poor man shares equally with the rich.

THEBAN HERALD Thou givest me here an advantage, as it might be in
a game of draughts; for the city, whence I come, is ruled by one man
only, not by the mob; none there puffs up the citizens with specious
words, and for his own advantage twists them this way or that,-one
moment dear to them and lavish of his favours, the next a bane to
all; and yet by fresh calumnies of others he hides his former failures
and escapes punishment. Besides, how shall the people, if it cannot
form true judgments, be able rightly to direct the state? Nay, 'tis
time, not haste, that affords a better understanding. A poor hind,
granted be he not all unschooled, would still be unable from his toil
to give his mind to politics. Verily the better sort count it no healthy
sign when the worthless man obtains a reputation by beguiling with
words the populace, though aforetime he was naught. 

THESEUS This herald is a clever fellow, a dabbler in the art of talk.
But since thou hast thus entered the lists with me, listen awhile,
for 'twas thou didst challenge a discussion. Naught is more hostile
to a city than a despot; where he is, there are first no laws common
to all, but one man is tyrant, in whose keeping and in his alone the
law resides, and in that case equality is at an end. But when the
laws are written down, rich and poor alike have equal justice, and
it is open to the weaker to use the same language to the prosperous
when he is reviled by him, and the weaker prevails over the stronger
if he have justice on his side. Freedom's mark is also seen in this:
"Who hath wholesome counsel to declare unto the state?" And he who
chooses to do so gains renown, while he, who hath no wish, remains
silent. What greater equality can there be in a city? Again, where
the people are absolute rulers of the land, they rejoice in having
reserve of youthful citizens, while a king counts this a hostile element,
and strives to slay the leading men, all such as he deems discreet,
for he feareth for his power. How then can a city remain stable, where
one cuts short all enterprise and mows down the young like meadow-flowers
in spring-time? What boots it to acquire wealth and livelihood for
children, merely to add to the tyrant's substance by one's toil? Why
train up virgin daughters virtuously in our homes to gratify a tyrant's
whim, whenso he will, and cause tears to those who rear them? May
my life end if ever my children are to be wedded by violence! This
bolt I launch in answer to thy words. Now say, why art thou come?
what needest thou of this land? Had not thy city sent thee, to thy
cost hadst thou come with thy outrageous utterances; for it is the
herald's duty to tell the message he is bidden and hie him back in
haste. Henceforth let Creon send to my city some other messenger less
talkative than thee. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Look you! how insolent the villains are, when
Fortune is kind to them, just as if it would be well with them for
ever. 

THEBAN HERALD Now will I speak. On these disputed points hold thou
this view, but the contrary. So I and all the people of Cadmus forbid
thee to admit Adrastus to this land, but if he is here, drive him
forth in disregard of the holy suppliant bough he bears, ere sinks
yon blazing sun, and attempt not violently to take up the dead, seeing
thou hast naught to do with the city of Argos. And if thou wilt hearken
to me, thou shalt bring thy barque of state into port unharmed by
the billows; but if not, fierce shall the surge of battle be, that
we and our allies shall raise. Take good thought, nor, angered at
my words, because forsooth thou rulest thy city with freedom, return
a vaunting answer from thy feebler means. Hope is man's curse; many
a state hath it involved in strife, by leading them into excessive
rage. For whenso the city has to vote on the question of war, no man
ever takes his own death into account, but shifts this misfortune
on to his neighbour; but if death had been before their eyes when
they were giving their votes, Hellas would ne'er have rushed to her
doom in mad desire for battle. And yet each man amongst us knows which
of the two to prefer, the good or ill, and how much better peace is
for mankind than war,-peace, the Muses' chiefest friend, the foe of
sorrow, whose joy is in glad throngs of children, and its delight
in prosperity. These are the blessings we cast away and wickedly embark
on war, man enslaving his weaker brother, and cities following suit.
Now thou art helping our foes even after death, trying to rescue and
bury those whom their own acts of insolence have ruined. Verily then
it would seem Capaneus was unjustly blasted by the thunderbolt and
charred upon the ladder he had raised against our gates, swearing
he would sack our town, whether the god would or no; nor should the
yawning earth have snatched away the seer, opening wide her mouth
to take his chariot and its horses in, nor should the other chieftains
be stretched at our gates, their skeletons to atoms crushed 'neath
boulders. Either boast thy wit transcendeth that of Zeus, or else
allow that gods are right to slay the ungodly. The wise should love
their children first, next their parents and country, whose fortunes
it behoves them to increase rather than break down. Rashness in a
leader, as in a pilot, causeth shipwreck; who knoweth when to be quiet
is a wise man. Yea and this too is bravery, even forethought.

LEADER The punishment Zeus hath inflicted was surely enough; there
was no need to heap this wanton insult on us. 

ADRASTUS Abandoned wretch! 

THESEUS Peace, Adrastus! say no more; set not thy words before mine,
for 'tis not to thee this fellow is come with his message, but to
me, and I must answer him. Thy first assertion will I answer first:
I am not aware that Creon is my lord and master, or that his power
outweigheth mine, that so he should compel Athens to act on this wise;
nay! for then would the tide of time have to flow backward, if we
are to be ordered, as he thinks. 'Tis not I who choose this war, seeing
that I did not even join these warriors to go unto the land of Cadmus;
but still I claim to bury the fallen dead, not injuring any state
nor yet introducing murderous strife, but preserving the law of all
Hellas. What is not well in this? If ye suffered aught from the Argives-lo!
they are dead; ye took a splendid vengeance on your foes and covered
them with shame, and now your right is at an end. Let the dead now
be buried in the earth, and each element return to the place from
whence it came to the body, the breath to the air, the body to the
ground; for in no wise did we get it for our own, but to live our
life in, and after that its mother earth must take it back again.
Dost think 'tis Argos thou art injuring in refusing burial to the
dead? Nay! all Hellas shares herein, if a man rob the dead of their
due and keep them from the tomb; for, if this law be enacted, it will
strike dismay into the stoutest hearts. And art thou come to cast
dire threats at me while thy own folk are afraid of giving burial
to the dead? What is your fear? Think you they will undermine your
land in their graves, or that they will beget children in the womb
of earth, from whom shall rise an avenger? A silly waste of words,
in truth it was, to show your fear of paltry groundless terrors. Go,
triflers, learn the lesson of human misery; our life is made up of
struggles; some men there be that find their fortune soon, others
have to wait, while some at once are blest. Fortune lives a dainty
life; to her the wretched pays his court and homage to win her smile;
her likewise doth the prosperous man extol, for fear the favouring
gale may leave him. These lessons should we take to heart, to bear
with moderation, free from wrath, our wrongs, and do naught to hurt
a whole city. What then? Let us, who will the pious deed perform,
bury the corpses of the slain. Else is the issue clear; I will go
and bury them by force. For never shall it be proclaimed through Hellas
that heaven's ancient law was set at naught, when it devolved on me
and the city of Pandion. 

LEADER Be of good cheer; for if thou preserve the light of justice,
thou shalt escape many a charge that men might urge. 

THEBAN HERALD Wilt thou that I sum up in brief all thou wouldst say?

THESEUS Say what thou wilt; for thou art not silent as it is.

THEBAN HERALD Thou shalt never take the sons of Argos from our land.

THESEUS Hear, then, my answer too to that, if so thou wilt.

THEBAN HERALD I will hear thee; not that I wish it, but I must give
thee thy turn. 

THESEUS I will bury the dead, when from Asopus' land I have removed
them. 

THEBAN HERALD First must thou adventure somewhat in the front of
war. 

THESEUS Many an enterprise and of a different kind have I ere this
endured. 

THEBAN HERALD Wert thou then begotten of thy sire to cope with every
foe? 

THESEUS Ay, with all wanton villains; virtue I punish not.

THEBAN HERALD To meddle is aye thy wont and thy city's too.

THESEUS Hence her enterprise on many a field hath won her many blessings.

THEBAN HERALD Come then, that the warriors of the dragon-crop may
catch thee in our city. 

THESEUS What furious warrior-host could spring from dragon's seed?

THEBAN HERALD Thou shalt learn that to thy cost. As yet thou art
young and rash. 

THESEUS Thy boastful speech stirs not my heart at all to rage. Yet
get thee gone from my land, taking with thee the idle words thou broughtest;
for we are making no advance.  (The THEBAN HERALD withdraws.)  'Tis
time for all to start, each stout footman, and whoso mounts the car;
'tis time the bit, dripping with foam, should urge the charger on
toward the land of Cadmus. For I will march in person to the seven
gates thereof with the sharp sword in my hand, and be myself my herald.
But thee, Adrastus, I bid stay, nor blend with mine thy fortunes,
for I will take my own good star to lead my host, a chieftain famed
in famous deeds of arms. One thing alone I need, the favour of all
gods that reverence right, for the presence of these things insures
victory. For their valour availeth men naught, unless they have the
god's goodwill.  (THESEUS and his retinue depart. The following lines
between the SEMI-CHORUSES are chanted responsively.)  

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Unhappy mothers of those hapless chiefs! How wildly
in my heart pale fear stirs up alarm! 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS What is this new cry thou utterest? 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS I fear the issue of the strife, whereto the hosts
of Pallas march. 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Dost speak of issues of the sword, or interchange
of words? 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS That last were gain indeed; but if the carnage
of battle, fighting, and the noise of beaten breasts again be heard
in the land, what, alas! will be said of me, who am the cause thereof?

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS Yet may fate again bring low the brilliant victor;
'tis this brave thought that twines about my heart. 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Thou speak'st of the gods as if they were just.

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS For who but they allot whate'er betides?

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS I see much at variance in their dealings with men.

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS The former fear hath warped thy judgment. Vengeance
calls vengeance forth; slaughter calls for slaughter, but the gods
give respite from affliction, holding in their own hands each thing's
allotted end. 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Would I could reach yon plains with turrets crowned,
leaving Callichorus, fountain of the goddess! 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS O that some god would give me wings to fly to
the city of rivers twain! 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS So might'st thou see and know the fortunes of thy
friends. 

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS What fate, what issue there awaits the valiant
monarch of this land? 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS Once more do we invoke the gods we called upon
before; yea, in our fear this is our first and chiefest trust.

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS O Zeus, father to the child the heifer-mother
bore in days long past, that daughter of Inachus! 

FIRST SEMI-CHORUS O be gracious, I pray, and champion this city!

SECOND SEMI-CHORUS 'Tis thy own darling, thy own settler in the city
of Argos that I am striving from outrage to rescue for the funeral
pyre.  (A MESSENGER enters.)  

MESSENGER Ladies, I bring you tidings of great joy, myself escaped-for
I was taken prisoner in the battle which cost those chieftains seven
their lives near Dirce's fount-to bear the news of Theseus' victory.
But I will save thee tedious questioning; I was the servant of Capaneus,
whom Zeus with scorching bolt to ashes burnt. 

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Friend of friends, fair thy news of thy own
return, nor less the news about Theseus; and if the host of Athens,
too, is safe, welcome will all thy message be. 

MESSENGER 'Tis safe, and all hath happened as I would it had befallen
Adrastus and his Argives, whom from Inachus he led, to march against
the city of the Cadmeans. 

LEADER How did the son of Aegeus and his fellow-warriors raise their
trophy to Zeus? Tell us, for thou wert there and canst gladden us
who were not. 

MESSENGER Bright shone the sun, one levelled line of light, upon
the world, as by Electra's gate I stood to watch, from a turret with
a far outlook. And lo! I saw the host in three divisions, deploying
its mail-clad warriors on the high ground by the banks of Ismenus;
this last I heard; and with them was the king himself, famous son
of Aegeus; his own men, natives of old Cecropia, were ranged upon
the right; while on the left, hard by the fountain of Ares, were the
dwellers by the sea, harnessed spearmen they; on either wing were
posted cavalry, in equal numbers, and chariots were stationed in the
shelter of Amphion's holy tomb. Meantime, the folk of Cadmus set themselves
before the walls, placing in the rear the bodies for which they fought.
Horse to horse, and car to car stood ranged. Then did the herald of
Theseus cry aloud to all: "Be still, ye folk! hush, ye ranks of Cadmus,
hearken! we are come to fetch the bodies of the slain, wishing to
bury them in observance of the universal law of Hellas; no wish have
we to lengthen out the slaughter." Not a word would Creon let his
herald answer back, but there he stood in silence under arms. Then
did the drivers of the four-horse cars begin the fray; on, past each
other they drave their chariots, bringing the warriors at their sides
up into line. Some fought with swords, some wheeled the horses back
to the fray again for those they drove. Now when Phorbas, who captained
the cavalry of the Erechtheidae, saw the thronging chariots, he and
they who had the charge of the Theban horse met hand to hand, and
by turns were victors and vanquished. The many horrors happening there
I saw, not merely heard about, for I was at the spot where the chariots
and their riders met and fought, but which to tell of first I know
not,-the clouds of dust that mounted to the sky, the warriors tangled
in the reins and dragged this way and that, the streams of crimson
gore, when men fell dead, or when, from shattered chariot-seats, they
tumbled headlong to the ground, and, amid the splinters of their cars,
gave up the ghost. But Creon, when he marked our cavalry's success
on one wing, caught up a shield and rushed into the fray, ere that
despondency should seize his men; but not for that did Theseus recoil
in fear; no! snatching up at once his glittering harnes he hied him
on. And the twain, clashing their shields together as they met in
the midst of the assembled host, were dealing death and courting it,
shouting loudly each to his fellow the battle-cry: "Slay, and with
thy spear strike home against the sons of Erechtheus." Fierce foes
to cope with were the warriors whom the dragon's teeth to manhood
reared; so fierce, they broke our left wing, albeit theirs was routed
by our right and put to flight, so that the struggle was evenly balanced.
Here again our chief deserved all praise, for this success was not
the only one he gained; no! next he sought that part of his army which
was wavering; and loud he called to them, that the earth rang again,
"My sons, if ye cannot restrain the earth-born warriors' stubborn
spear, the cause of Pallas is lost." His word inspired new courage
in all the Danaid host. Therewith himself did seize a fearsome mace,
weapon of Epidaurian warfare, and swung it to and fro, and with that
club, as with a sickle, he shore off necks and heads and helmets thereupon.
Scarce even then they turned themselves to fly. I cried aloud for
joy, and danced and clapped my hands; while to the gates they ran.
Throughout the town echoed the shrieks of young and old, as they crowded
the temples in terror. But Theseus, when he might have come inside
the walls, held back his men, for he had not come, said he, to sack
the town, but to ask for the bodies of the dead. Such the general
men should choose, one who shows his bravery in danger, yet hates
the pride of those that in their hour of fortune lose the bliss they
might have enjoyed, through seeking to scale the ladder's topmost
step. 

LEADER Now do I believe in the gods after seeing this unexpected
day, and feel my woes are lighter now that these have paid their penalty.

ADRASTUS O Zeus, why do men assert the wisdom of the wretched human
race? On thee we all depend, and all we do is only what thou listest.
We thought our Argos irresistible, ourselves a young and lusty host,
and so when Eteocles was for making terms, in spite of his fair offer
we would not accept them, and so we perished. Then in their turn those
foolish folk of Cadmus, to fortune raised, like some beggar with his
newly-gotten wealth, waxed wanton, and, waxing so, were ruined in
their turn. Ye foolish sons of men! who strain your bow like men who
shoot beyond their mark, and only by suffering many evils as ye deserve,
though deaf to friends, yet yield to circumstances; ye cities likewise,
though ye might by parley end your ills, yet ye choose the sword instead
of reason to settle all disputes. But wherefore these reflections?
This I fain would learn, the way thou didst escape; and after that
I will ask thee of the rest. 

MESSENGER During the uproar which prevailed in the city owing to
the battle, I passed the gates, just as the host had entered them.

ADRASTUS Are ye bringing the bodies, for the which the strife arose?

MESSENGER Ay, each of the seven chiefs who led their famous hosts.

ADRASTUS What sayest thou? the rest who fell-say, where are they?

MESSENGER They have found burial in the dells of Cithaeron.

ADRASTUS On this or that side of the mount? And who did bury them?

MESSENGER Theseus buried them 'neath the shadow of Eleutherae's cliff.

ADRASTUS Where didst thou leave the dead he hath not buried?

MESSENGER Not far away; earnest haste makes every goal look close.

ADRASTUS No doubt in sorrow slaves would gather them from the carnage.

MESSENGER Slaves! not one of them was set to do this toil.

(A speech belonging to ADRASTUS has been lost.) 

MESSENGER Thou wouldst say so, hadst thou been there to see his loving
tendance of the dead. 

ADRASTUS Did he himself wash the bloody wounds of the hapless youths?

MESSENGER Ay, and strewed their biers and wrapped them in their shrouds.

ADRASTUS An awful burden this, involving some disgrace.

MESSENGER Why, what disgrace to men are their fellows' sorrows?

ADRASTUS Ah me! how much rather had I died with them! 

MESSENGER 'Tis vain to weep and move to tears these women.

ADRASTUS Methinks 'tis they who give the lesson. Enough of that!
My hands lift at meeting of the dead, and pour forth a tearful dirge
to Hades, calling on my friends, whose loss I mourn in wretched solitude;
for this one thing, when once 'tis spent, man cannot recover, the
breath of life, though he knoweth ways to get his wealth again.

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

Joy is here and sorrow too,-for the state fair fame, and for our
captains double meed of honour. Bitter for me it is to see the limbs
of my dead sons, and yet a welcome sight withal, because I shall behold
the unexpected day after sorrow's cup was full. 

(antistrophe)

Would that Father Time had kept me unwed from my youth up e'en till
now when I am old! What need had I of children? Methinks I should
not have suffered overmuch, had I never borne the marriage-yoke; but
now I have my sorrow full in view, the loss of children dear.

Lo! I see the bodies of the fallen youths. Woe is me! would I could
join these children in their death and descend to Hades with them!
(THESEUS and his soldiers enter, carrying the corpses of the slain
chieftains. ADRASTUS and the CHORUS chant the lament responsively.)

ADRASTUS Mothers, raise the wail for the dead departed; cry in answer
when ye hear my note of woe. 

CHORUS My sons, my sons! O bitter words for loving mothers to address
to you! To thee, my lifeless child, I call. 

ADRASTUS Woe! woe! 

CHORUS Ah me, my sufferings! 

ADRASTUS Alas! We have endured, alas!- 

CHORUS Sorrows most grievous. 

ADRASTUS O citizens of Argos! do ye not behold my fate?

CHORUS They see thee, and me the hapless mother, reft of her children.

ADRASTUS Bring near the blood-boltered corpses of those hapless chiefs,
foully slain by foes unworthy, with whom lay the decision of the contest.

CHORUS Let me embrace and hold my children to my bosom in my enfolding
arms. 

ADRASTUS There, there! thou hast- 

CHORUS Sorrows heavy enough to bear. 

ADRASTUS Ah me! 

CHORUS Thy groans mingle with those of their parents. 

ADRASTUS Hear me. 

CHORUS O'er both of us thou dost lament. 

ADRASTUS Would God the Theban ranks had laid me dead in the dust!

CHORUS Oh that I had ne'er been wedded to a husband! 

ADRASTUS Ah! hapless mothers, behold this sea of troubles!

CHORUS Our nails have ploughed our cheeks in furrows, and o'er our
heads have we strewn ashes. 

ADRASTUS Ah me! ah me! Oh that earth's floor would swallow me, or
the whirlwind snatch me away, or Zeus's flaming bolt descend upon
my head! 

CHORUS Bitter the marriages thou didst witness, bitter the oracle
of Phoebus! The curse of Oedipus, fraught with sorrow, after desolating
his house, is come on thee. 

THESEUS I meant to question thee when thou wert venting thy lamentations
to the host, but I will let it pass; yet, though I dropped the matter
then and left it alone, I now do ask Adrastus, "Of what lineage sprang
those youths, to shine so bright in chivalry?" Tell it to our younger
citizens of thy fuller wisdom, for thou art skilled to know. Myself
beheld their daring deeds, too high for words to tell, whereby they
thought to capture Thebes. One question will I spare thee, lest I
provoke thy laughter; the foe that each of them encountered in the
fray, the spear from which each received his death-wound. These be
idle tales alike for those who hear or him who speaks, that any man
amid the fray, when clouds of darts are hurtling before his eyes,
should declare for certain who each champion is. I could not ask such
questions, nor yet believe those who dare assert the like; for when
a man is face to face with the foe, he scarce can see even that which
'tis his bounden duty to observe. 

ADRASTUS Hearken then. For in giving this task to me thou findest
a willing eulogist of friends, whose praise I would declare in all
truth and sincerity. Dost see yon corpse by Zeus's bolt transfixed?
That is Capaneus; though he had ample wealth, yet was he the last
to boast of his prosperity; nor would he ever vaunt himself above
a poorer neighbour, but shunned the man whose sumptuous board had
puffed him up too high and made him scorn mere competence, for he
held that virtue lies not in greedy gluttony, but that moderate means
suffice. True friend was he, alike to present or to absent friends
the same; of such the number is not great. His was guileless character,
a courteous address, that left no promise unperformed either towards
his own household or his fellow-citizens. The next I name is Eteoclus;
a master he of other kinds of excellence; young, nor richly dowered
with store, yet high in honour in the Argive land. And though his
friends oft offered gifts of gold, he would not have it in his house,
to make his character its slave by taking wealth's yoke upon him.
Not his city, but those that sinned against her did he hate, for a
city is no wise to be blamed if it get an evil name by reason of an
evil governor. Such another was Hippomedon, third of all this band;
from his very boyhood he refrained from turning towards the allurements
of the Muses, to lead life of ease; his home was in the fields, and
gladly would he school his nature to hardships with a view to manliness,
aye hasting to the chase, rejoicing in his steeds or straining of
his bow, because he would make himself of use unto his state. Next
behold the huntress Atalanta's son, Parthenopaeus, a youth of peerless
beauty; from Arcady he came even to the streams of Inachus, and in
Argos spent his boyhood. There, when he grew to man's estate, first,
as is the duty of strangers settled in another land, he showed no
pique or jealousy against the state, became no quibbler, chiefest
source of annoyance citizen or stranger can give, but took his stand
amid the host, and fought for Argos as he were her own son, glad at
heart whenso the city prospered, deeply grieved if e'er reverses came;
many a lover though he had midst men and maids, yet was he careful
to avoid offence. Of Tydeus next the lofty praise I will express in
brief; no brilliant spokesman he, but a clever craftsman in the art
of war, with many a shrewd device; inferior in judgment to his brother
Meleager, yet through his warrior skill lending his name to equal
praise, for he had found in arms a perfect science; his was an ambitious
nature, a spirit rich in store of deeds, with words less fully dowered.
From this account then wonder not, Theseus, that they dared to die
before the towers; for noble nurture carries honour with it, and every
man, when once he hath practised virtue, scorns the name of villain.
Courage may be learnt, for even a babe doth learn to speak and hear
things it cannot comprehend; and whatso'er a child hath learnt, this
it is his wont to treasure up till he is old. So train up your children
in a virtuous way. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Alas! my son, to sorrow I bare thee and carried
thee within my womb, enduring the pangs of travail; but now Hades
takes the fruit of all my hapless toil, and I that had a son am left,
ah me! with none to nurse my age. 

THESEUS As for the noble son of Oecleus, him, while yet he lived,
the gods snatched hence to the bowels of the earth, and his chariot
too, manifestly blessing him; while I myself may truthfully tell the
praises of the son of Oedipus, that is, Polyneices, for he was my
guest-friend ere he left the town of Cadmus and crossed to Argos in
voluntary exile. But dost thou know what I would have thee do in this?

ADRASTUS I know naught save this,-to yield obedience to thy hests.

THESEUS As for yon Capaneus, stricken by the bolt of Zeus-

ADRASTUS Wilt bury him apart as a consecrated corpse? 

THESEUS Even so; but all the rest on one funeral pyre. 

ADRASTUS Where wilt thou set the tomb apart for him? 

THESEUS Here near this temple have I builded him a sepulchre.

ADRASTUS Thy thralls forthwith must undertake this toil.

THESEUS Myself will look to those others; let the biers advance.

ADRASTUS Approach your sons, unhappy mothers. 

THESEUS This thy proposal, Adrastus, is anything but good.

ADRASTUS Must not the mothers touch their sons? 

THESEUS It would kill them to see how they are altered.

ADRASTUS 'Tis bitter, truly, to see the dead even at the moment of
death. 

THESEUS Why then wilt thou add fresh grief to them? 

ADRASTUS Thou art right. Ye needs must patiently abide, for the words
of Theseus are good. But when we have committed them unto the flames,
ye shall collect their bones. O wretched sons of men! Why do ye get
you weapons and bring slaughter on one another? Cease therefrom, give
o'er your toiling, and in mutual peace keep safe your cities. Short
is the span of life, so 'twere best to run its course as lightly as
we may, from trouble free.  (The corpses, followed by the CHILDREN
of the slain chieftains, are carried off to the pyre which is kindled
within the sight of the persons on the stage.)  

CHORUS  (singing, strophe)

No more a happy mother I, with children blest; no more I share, among
Argive women, who have sons, their happy lot; nor any more will Artemis
in the hour of travail kindly greet these childless mothers. Most
dreary is my life, and like some wandering cloud drift before the
howling blast. 

(antistrophe)

The seven noblest sons in Argos once we had, we seven hapless mothers;
but now my sons are dead, I have no child, and on me steals old age
in piteous wise, nor 'mongst the dead nor 'mongst the living do I
count myself, having as it were a lot apart from these. 

Tears alone are left me; in my house sad memories of my son are stored;
mournful tresses shorn from his head, chaplets that he wore, libations
for the dead departed, and songs, but not such as golden-haired Apollo
welcometh; and when I wake to weep, my tears will ever drench the
folds of my robe upon my bosom. Ah! there I see the sepulchre ready
e'en now for Capaneus, his consecrated tomb, and the votive offerings
Theseus gives unto the dead outside the shrine, and nigh yon lightning-smitten
chief I see his noble bride, Evadne, daughter of King Iphis. Wherefore
stands she on the towering rock, which o'ertops this temple, advancing
along yon path?  (EVADNE is seen on a rock which overhangs the burning
pyre. She is dressed as though for a festival.)  

EVADNE  (chanting) What light, what radiancy did the sun-god's car
dart forth, and the moon athwart the firmament, while round her in
the gloom swift stars careered, in the day that the city of Argos
raised the stately chant of joy at my wedding, in honour of my marriage
with mail-clad Capaneus? Now from my home in frantic haste with frenzied
mind rush to join thee, seeking to share with thee the fire's bright
flame and the self-same tomb, to rid me of my weary life in Hades'
halls, and of the pains of life; yea, for 'tis the sweetest end to
share the death of those we love, if only fate will sanction it.

LEADER OF THE CHORUS Behold yon pyre, which thou art overlooking,
nigh thereto, set apart for Zeus! There is thy husband's body, vanquished
by the blazing bolt. 

EVADNE  (chanting) Life's goal I now behold from my station here;
may fortune aid me in my headlong leap from this rock in honour's
cause, down into the fire below. to mix my ashes in the ruddy blaze
with my husband's, to lay me side by side with him, there in the couch
of Persephone; for ne'er will to save my life, prove untrue to thee
where thou liest in thy grave. Away with life and marriage too! Oh!
may my children live to see the dawn of a fairer, happier wedding-day
in Argos! May loyalty inspire the husband's heart, his nature fusing
with his wife's! 

LEADER Lo! the aged Iphis, thy father, draweth nigh to hear thy startling
speech, which yet he knows not and will grieve to learn.  (IPHIS enters.)

IPHIS Unhappy child! lo! I am come, a poor old man, with twofold
sorrow in my house to mourn, that I may carry to his native land the
corpse of my son Eteoclus, slain by the Theban spear, and further
in quest of my daughter who rushed headlong from the house, for she
was the wife of Capaneus and longed with him to die. Ere this she
was well guarded in my house, but, when I took the watch away in the
present troubles, she escaped. But I feel sure that she is here; tell
me if ye have seen her. 

EVADNE Why question them? Lo, here upon the rock, father, o'er the
pyre of Capaneus, like some bird I hover lightly, in my wretchedness.

IPHIS What wind hath blown thee hither, child? Whither thy journey?
Why didst thou pass the threshold of my house and seek this land?

EVADNE It would but anger thee to hear what I intend, and so I fain
would keep thee ignorant, my father. 

IPHIS What hath not thy own father a right to know? 

EVADNE Thou wouldst not wisely judge my purpose. 

IPHIS Why dost thou deck thyself in that apparel? 

EVADNE A purport strange this robe conveys, father. 

IPHIS Thou hast no look of mourning for thy lord. 

EVADNE No, the reason why I thus am decked is strange, maybe.

IPHIS Dost thou in such garb appear before a funeral-pyre?

EVADNE Yea, for hither it is I come to take the meed of victory.

IPHIS "Victory!" What victory? This would I learn of thee.

EVADNE A victory o'er all women on whom the sun looks down.

IPHIS In Athena's handiwork or in prudent counsel? 

EVADNE In bravery; for I will lay me down and die with my lord.

IPHIS What dost thou say? What is this silly riddle thou propoundest?

EVADNE To yonder pyre where lies dead Capaneus, I will leap down.

IPHIS My daughter, speak not thus before the multitude!

EVADNE The very thing I wish, that every Argive should learn it.

IPHIS Nay, I will ne'er consent to let thee do this deed.

EVADNE 'Tis all one; thou shalt never catch me in thy grasp. Lo!
I cast me down, no joy to thee, but to myself and to my husband blazing
on the pyre with me.  (She leaps into the pyre.)  

CHORUS  (chanting) O lady, thou hast done a fearful deed!

IPHIS Ah me! I am undone, ye dames of Argos! 

CHORUS  (chanting) Alack, alack! a cruel blow is this to thee, but
thou must yet witness, poor wretch, the full horror of this deed.

IPHIS A more unhappy wretch than me ye could not find. 

CHORUS  (chanting) Woe for thee, unhappy man! Thou, old sir, hast
been made partaker in the fortune of Oedipus, thou and my poor city
too. 

IPHIS Ah, why are mortal men denied this boon, to live their youth
twice o'er, and twice in turn to reach old age? If aught goes wrong
within our homes, we set it right by judgment more maturely formed,
but our life we may not so correct. Now if we had a second spell of
youth and age, this double term of life would let us then correct
each previous slip. For I, seeing others blest with children, longed
to have them too, and found my ruin in that wish. Whereas if I had
had present experience, and by a father's light had learnt how cruel
a thing it is to be bereft of children, never should have fallen on
such evil days as these,-I who did beget a brave young son, proud
parent that I was, and after all am now bereft of him. Enough of this.
What remains for such a hapless wretch as me? Shall I to my home,
there to see its utter desolation and the blank within my life? or
shall to the halls of that dead Capaneus?-halls I smiled to see in
days gone by, when yet my daughter was alive. But she is lost and
gone, she that would ever draw down my cheek to her lips, and take
my head between her hands; for naught is there more sweet unto an
aged sire than a daughter's love; our sons are made of sterner stuff,
but less winning are their caresses. Oh! take me to my house at once,
in darkness hide me there, to waste and fret this aged frame with
fasting! What shall it avail me to touch my daughter's bones? Old
age, resistless foe, how do I loathe thy presence! Them too I hate,
whoso desire to lengthen out the span of life, seeking to turn the
tide of death aside by philtres, drugs, and magic spells,-folk that
death should take away to leave the young their place, when they no
more can benefit the world.  (IPHIS departs. A procession enters from
the direction of the pyre, led by the CHILDREN of the slain chieftains,
who carry the ashes of their fathers in funeral urns. The following
lines between the CHORUS and the CHILDREN are chanted responsively.)

CHORUS Woe, woe! Behold your dead sons' bones are brought hither;
take them, servants of your weak old mistress, for in me is no strength
left by reason of my mourning for my sons; time's comrade long have
I been, and many a tear for many a sorrow have I shed. For what sharper
pang wilt thou ever find for mortals than the sight of children dead?

CHILDREN Poor mother mine, behold I bring my father's bones gathered
from the fire, a burden grief has rendered heavy, though this tiny
urn contains my all. 

CHORUS Ah me! ah me! Why bear thy tearful load to the fond mother
of the dead, a handful of ashes in the stead of those who erst were
men of mark in Mycenae? 

CHILDREN Woe worth the hour! woe worth the day! Reft of my hapless
sire, a wretched orphan shall I inherit a desolate house, torn from
my father's arms. 

CHORUS Woe is thee! Where is now the toil I spent upon my sons? what
thank have I for nightly watch? Where the mother's nursing care? the
sleepless vigils mine eyes have kept? the loving kiss upon my children's
brow? 

CHILDREN Thy sons are dead and gone. Poor mother! dead and gone;
the boundless air now wraps them round. 

CHORUS Turned to ashes by the flame, they have winged their flight
to, Hades. 

CHILDREN Father, thou hearest thy children's lamentation; say, shall
I e'er, as warrior dight, avenge thy slaughter? 

CHORUS God grant it, O my child 

CHILDREN Some day, if god so will, shall the avenging of my father
be my task; not yet this sorrow sleeps. 

CHORUS Alas! Fortune's sorrows are enough for me, I have enough of
troubles now. 

CHILDREN Shall Asopus' laughing tide ever reflect my brazen arms
as I lead on my Argive troops? 

CHORUS To avenge thy fallen sire. 

CHILDREN Methinks I see thee still before my eye, my father-

CHORUS Printing a loving kiss upon thy cheek. 

CHILDREN But thy words of exhortation are borne on the winds away.

CHORUS Two mourners hath he left behind, thy mother and thee, bequeathing
to thee an endless legacy of grief for thy father. 

CHILDREN The weight of grief I have to bear hath crushed me utterly.

CHORUS Come, let me clasp the ashes of my son to my bosom.

CHILDREN I weep to hear that piteous word; 'it stabs me to the heart,

CHORUS My child, thou art undone; no more shall I behold thee, thy
own fond mother's treasure. 

THESEUS Adrastus, and ye dames from Argos sprung, ye see these children
bearing in their hands the bodies of their valiant sires whom I redeemed;
to thee I give these gifts, I and Athens. And ye must bear in mind
the memory of this favour, marking well the treatment ye have had
of me. And to these children I repeat the self-same words, that they
may honour this city, to children's children ever handing on the kindness
ye received from us. Be Zeus the witness, with the gods in heaven,
of the treatment we vouchsafed you ere you left us. 

ADRASTUS Theseus, well we know all the kindness thou hast conferred
upon the land of Argos in her need, and ours shall be a gratitude
that never waxeth old, for your generous treatment makes us debtors
for a like return. 

THESEUS What yet remains, wherein I can serve you? 

ADRASTUS Fare thee well, for such is thy desert and such thy city's
too. 

THESEUS Even so. Mayst thou too have the self-same fortune!  (ATHENA
appears from above.)  

ATHENA Hearken, Theseus, to the words that I Athena utter, telling
thee thy duty, which, if thou perform it, will serve thy city. Give
not these bones to the children to carry to the land of Argos, letting
them go so lightly; nay, take first an oath of them that they will
requite thee and thy city for your efforts. This oath must Adrastus
swear, for as their king it is his right to take the oath for the
whole realm of Argos. And this shall be the form thereof: "We Argives
swear we never will against this land lead on our mail-clad troops
to war, and, if others come, we will repel them." But if they violate
their oath and come against the city, pray that the land of Argos
may be miserably destroyed. Now hearken while I tell thee where thou
must slay the victims. Thou hast within thy halls a tripod with brazen
feet, which Heracles, in days gone by, after he had o'erthrown the
foundations of Ilium and was starting on another enterprise, enjoined
the to set up at the Pythian shrine. O'er it cut the throats of three
sheep; then grave within the tripod's hollow belly the oath; this
done, deliver it to the god who watches over Delphi to keep, a witness
and memorial unto Hellas of the oath. And bury the sharp-edged knife,
wherewith thou shalt have laid the victims open and shed their blood,
deep in the bowels of the earth, hard by the pyres where the seven
chieftains burn; for its appearance shall strike them with dismay,
if e'er against thy town they come, and shall cause them to return
with sorrow. When thou hast done all this, dismiss the dead from thy
land. And to the god resign as sacred land the spot where their bodies
were purified by fire, there by the meeting of the triple roads that
lead unto the Isthmus. Thus much to thee, Theseus, address; next to
the sons of Argos I speak; when ye are grown to men's estate, the
town beside Ismenus shall ye sack, avenging the slaughter of your
dead sires; thou too, Aegialeus, shalt take thy father's place and
in thy youth command the host, and with thee Tydeus' son marching
from Aetolia,-him whom his father named Diomedes. Soon as the beards
your cheeks o'ershadow must ye lead an armed Danaid host against the
battlements of Thebes with sevenfold gates. For to their sorrow shall
ye come like lion's whelps in full-grown might to sack their city.
No otherwise is it to be; and ye shall be a theme for minstrels' songs
in days to come, known through Hellas as "the After-born"; so famous
shall your expedition be, thanks to Heaven. 

THESEUS Queen Athena, I will hearken to thy bidding; for thou it
is dost set me up, so that I go not astray. And I will bind this monarch
by an oath; do thou but guide my steps aright. For if thou art friendly
to our state, we shall henceforth live secure.  (ATHENA vanishes.)

CHORUS  (chanting) Let us go, Adrastus, and take the oath to this
monarch and his state; for the service they have already done us claims
our reverence. 

THEEND
 Before Agamemnon's Tent in the Camp near Troy. HECUBA asleep. Enter
POSEIDON.

----------------------------------------------------------------------

POSEIDON Lo! From the depths of salt Aegean floods I, Poseidon,
come, where choirs of Nereids trip in the mazes of the graceful dance;
for since the day that Phoebus and myself with measurement exact set
towers of stone about this land of Troy and ringed it round, never
from my heart hath passed away a kindly feeling for my Phrygian town,
which now is smouldering and o'erthrown, a prey to Argive prowess.
For, from his home beneath Parnassus, Phocian Epeus, aided by the
craft of Pallas, framed a horse to bear within its womb an armed host,
and sent it within the battlements, fraught with death; whence in
days to come men shall tell of "the wooden horse," with its hidden
load of warriors. Groves forsaken stand and temples of the gods run
down with blood, and at the altar's very base, before the god who
watched his home, lies Priam dead. While to Achaean ships great store
of gold and Phrygian spoils are being conveyed, and they who came
against this town, those sons Of Hellas, only wait a favouring breeze
to follow in their wake, that after ten long years they may with joy
behold their wives and children. Vanquished by Hera, Argive goddess,
and by Athena, who helped to ruin Phrygia, I am leaving Ilium, that
famous town, and the altars that I love; for when drear desolation
seizes on a town, the worship of the gods decays and tends to lose
respect. Scamander's banks re-echo long and loud the screams of captive
maids, as they by lot receive their masters. Arcadia taketh some,
and some the folk of Thessaly; others are assigned to Theseus' sons,
the Athenian chiefs. And such of the Trojan dames as are not portioned
out, are in these tents, set apart for the leaders of the host; and
with them Spartan Helen, daughter of Tyndarus, justly counted among
the captives. And wouldst thou see that queen of misery, Hecuba, thou
canst; for there she lies before the gates, weeping many a bitter
tear for many a tribulation; for at Achilles' tomb-though she knows
not this-her daughter Polyxena has died most piteously; likewise is
Priam dead, and her children too; Cassandra, whom the king Apollo
left to be a virgin, frenzied maid, hath Agamemnon, in contempt of
the god's ordinance and of piety, forced to a dishonoured wedlock.
Farewell, O city prosperous once! farewell, ye ramparts of hewn stone!
had not Pallas, daughter of Zeus, decreed thy ruin, thou wert standing
firmly still.  (Enter ATHENA.)  

ATHENA May I address the mighty god whom Heaven reveres and who to
my own sire is very nigh in blood, laying aside our former enmity?

POSEIDON Thou mayst; for o'er the soul the ties of kin exert no feeble
spell, great queen Athena. 

ATHENA For thy forgiving mood my thanks! Somewhat have I to impart
affecting both thyself and me, O king. 

POSEIDON Bringst thou fresh tidings from some god, from Zeus, or
from some lesser power? 

ATHENA From none of these; but on behalf of Troy, whose soil we tread,
am I come to seek thy mighty aid, to make it one with mine.

POSEIDON What! hast thou laid thy former hate aside to take compassion
on the town now that it is burnt to ashes? 

ATHENA First go back to the former point; wilt thou make common cause
with me in the scheme I purpose? 

POSEIDON Ay surely; but I would fain learn thy wishes, whether thou
art come to help Achaens or Phrygians. 

ATHENA I wish to give my former foes, the Trojans, joy, and on the
Achaean host impose a return that they will rue. 

POSEIDON Why leap'st thou thus from mood to mood? Thy love and hate
both go too far, on whomsoever centred. 

ATHENA Dost not know the insult done to me and to the shrine I love?

POSEIDON Surely, in the hour that Aias tore Cassandra thence.

ATHENA Yea, and the Achaeans did naught, said naught to him.

POSEIDON And yet 'twas by thy mighty aid they sacked Ilium.

ATHENA For which cause I would join with thee to work their bane.

POSEIDON My powers are ready at thy will. What is thy intent?

ATHENA A returning fraught with woe will I impose on them.

POSEIDON While yet they stay on shore, or as they cross the briny
deep? 

ATHENA When they have set sail from Ilium for their homes. On them
will Zeus also send his rain and fearful hail, and inky tempests from
the sky; yea, and he promises to grant me his levin-bolts to hurl
on the Achaeans and fire their ships. And do thou, for thy part, make
the Aegean strait to roar with mighty billows and whirlpools, and
fill Euboea's hollow bay with corpses, that Achaeans may learn henceforth
to reverence my temples and regard all other deities. 

POSEIDON So shall it be, for the boon thou cravest needs but few
words. I will vex the broad Aegean sea; and the beach of Myconus and
the reefs round Delos, Scyros and Lemnos too, and the cliffs of Caphareus
shall be strown with many a corpse. Mount thou to Olympus, and taking
from thy father's hand his lightning bolts, keep careful watch against
the hour when Argos' host lets slip its cables. A fool is he who sacks
the towns of men, with shrines and tombs, the dead man's hallowed
home, for at the last he makes a desert round himself, and dies. Exeunt.

HECUBA  (Awakening) Lift thy head, unhappy lady, from the ground;
thy neck upraise; this is Troy no more, no longer am I queen in Ilium.
Though fortune change, endure thy lot; sail with the stream, and follow
fortune's tack, steer not thy barque of life against the tide, since
chance must guide thy course. Ah me! ah me! What else but tears is
now my hapless lot, whose country, children, husband, all are lost?
Ah! the high-blown pride of ancestors! how cabined now how brought
to nothing after all What woe must I suppress, or what declare? What
plaintive dirge shall I awake? Ah, woe is me! the anguish I suffer
lying here stretched upon this pallet hard! O my head, my temples,
my side! Ah! could I but turn over, and he now on this, now on that,
to rest my back and spine, while ceaselessly my tearful wail ascends.
Fore 'en this is music to the wretched, to chant their cheerless dirge
of sorrow. 

Ye swift-prowed ships, rowed to sacred Ilium o'er the deep dark sea,
past the fair havens of Hellas, to the flute's ill-omened music and
the dulcet voice of pipes, even to the bays of Troyland (alack the
day!), wherein ye tied your hawsers, twisted handiwork from Egypt,
in quest of that hateful wife of Menelaus, who brought disgrace on
Castor, and on Eurotas foul reproach; murderess she of Priam, sire
of fifty children, the cause why I, the hapless Hecuba, have wrecked
my life upon this troublous strand. Oh that I should sit here o'er
against the tent of Agamemnon Forth from my home to slavery they hale
my aged frame, while from my head in piteous wise the hair is shorn
for grief. Ah! hapless wives of those mail-clad sons of Troy! Ah!
poor maidens, luckless brides, come weep, for Ilium is now but a ruin;
and I, like some mother-bird that o're her fledglings screams, will
begin the strain; how different from that song I sang to the gods
in days long past, as I leaned on Priam's staff, and beat with my
foot in Phrygian time to lead the dance!  (Enter CHORUS OF CAPTIVE
TROJAN WOMEN.)  

SEMI-CHORUS O Hecuba why these cries, these piercing shrieks? What
mean thy words? For I heard thy piteous wail echo through the building,
and a pang terror shoots through each captive Trojan's breast, as
pent within these walls they mourn their slavish lot. 

HECUBA My child, e'en now the hands of Argive rowers are busy at
their ships. 

SEMI-CHORUS Ah, woe is me! what is their intent? Will they really
bear me hence in sorrow from my country in their fleet? 

HECUBA I know not, though I guess our doom. 

SEMI-CHORUS O misery! woe to us Trojan dames, soon to hear the order
given, "Come forth from the house; the Argives are preparing to return."

HECUBA Oh! do not bid the wild Cassandra leave her chamber, the frantic
prophetess, for Argives to insult, nor to my griefs add yet another.
Woe to thee, ill-fated Troy, thy sun is set; and woe to thy unhappy
children, quick and dead alike, who are leaving thee behind!

SEMI-CHORUS II With trembling step, alas! I leave this tent of Agamemnon
to learn of thee, my royal mistress, whether the Argives have resolved
to take my wretched life, whether the sailors at the prow are making
ready to ply their oars. 

HECUBA My child, a fearful dread seized on my wakeful heart and sent
me hither. 

SEMI-CHORUS II Hath a herald from the Danai already come? To whom
am I, poor captive, given as a slave? 

HECUBA Thou art not far from being allotted now. 

SEMI-CHORUS II Woe worth the day! What Argive or Phthiotian chief
will bear me far from Troy, alas! unto his home, or haply to some
island fastness? 

HECUBA Ah me! ah me! Whose slave shall I become in my old age? in
what far clime? a poor old drone, the wretched copy of a corpse, set
to keep the gate or tend their children, I who once held royal rank
in Troy. 

CHORUS Woe, woe is thee! What piteous dirge wilt thou devise to mourn
the outrage done thee? No more through Ida's looms shall I-ply the
shuttle to and fro. I look my last and latest on my children's bodies;
henceforth shall I endure surpassing misery; it may be as the unwilling
bride of some Hellene (perish the night and fortune that brings me
to this!); it may be as a wretched slave I from Peirene's sacred fount
shall draw their store of water. 

Oh be it ours to come to Theseus' famous realm, a land of joy! Never,
never let me see Eurotas' swirling tide, hateful home of Helen, there
to meet and be the slave of Menelaus, whose hand laid Troyland waste!
Yon holy land by Peneus fed, nestling in all its beauty at Olympus'
foot, is said, so have I heard, to be a very granary of wealth and
teeming fruitage; next to the sacred soil of Theseus, I could wish
to reach that land. They tell me too Hephaestus' home, beneath the
shadow of Aetna, fronting Phoenicia, the mother of Sicilian hills,
is famous for the crowns it gives to worth. Or may I find a home on
that shore which lieth very nigh Ionia's sea, a land by Crathis watered,
lovely stream, that dyes the hair an auburn tint, feeding with its
holy waves and making glad therewith the home of heroes good and true.

But mark! a herald from the host of Danai, with store of fresh proclamations,
comes hasting hither. What is his errand? what saith he? List, for
we are slaves to Dorian lords henceforth.  (Enter TALTHYBIUS.)

TALTHYBIUS Hecuba, thou knowest me from my many journeys to and fro
as herald 'twixt the Achaean host and Troy; no stranger I to thee,
lady, even aforetime, I Talthybius, now sent with a fresh message.

HECUBA Ah, kind friends, 'tis come! what I so long have dreaded.

TALTHYBIUS The lot has decided your fates already, if that was what
you feared. 

HECUBA Ah me! What city didst thou say, Thessalian, Phthian, or Cadmean?

TALTHYBIUS Each warrior took his prize in turn; ye were not all at
once assigned. 

HECUBA To whom hath the lot assigned us severally? Which of us Trojan
dames doth a happy fortune await? 

TALTHYBIUS I know, but ask thy questions separately, not all at once.

HECUBA Then tell me, whose prize is my daughter, hapless Cassandra?

TALTHYBIUS King Agamemnon hath chosen her out for himself.

HECUBA To be the slave-girl of his Spartan wife? Ah me!

TALTHYBIUS Nay, to share with him his stealthy love. 

HECUBA What! Phoebus' virgin-priestess, to whom the god with golden
locks granted the boon of maidenhood? 

TALTHYBIUS The dart of love hath pierced his heart, love for the
frenzied maid. 

HECUBA Daughter, cast from thee the sacred keys, and from thy body
tear the holy wreaths that drape thee in their folds. 

TALTHYBIUS Why! is it not an honour high that she should win our
monarch's love? 

HECUBA What have ye done to her whom late ye took from me-my child?

TALTHYBIUS Dost mean Polyxena, or whom dost thou inquire about?

HECUBA To whom hath the lot assigned her? 

TALTHYBIUS To minister at Achilles' tomb hath been appointed her.

HECUBA Woe is me! I the mother of a dead man's slave! What custom,
what ordinance is this amongst Hellenes, good sir? 

TALTHYBIUS Count thy daughter happy: 'tis well with her.

HECUBA What wild words are these? say, is she still alive?

TALTHYBIUS Her fate is one that sets her free from trouble.

HECUBA And what of mail-clad Hector's wife, sad Andromache? declare
her fate. 

TALTHYBIUS She too was a chosen prize; Achilles' son did take her.

HECUBA As for me whose hair is white with age, who need to hold a
staff to be to me a third foot, whose servant am I to be?

TALTHYBIUS Odysseus, king of Ithaca, hath taken thee to be his slave.

HECUBA O God! Now smite the close-shorn head! tear your cheeks with
your nails. God help me! I have fallen as a slave to a treacherous
foe I hate, a monster of lawlessness, one that by his double tongue
hath turned against us all that once was friendly in his camp, changing
this for that and that for this again. Oh weep for me, ye Trojan dames!
Undone! undone and lost! ah woel a victim to a most unhappy lot!

CHORUS Thy fate, royal mistress, now thou knowest; but for me, what
Hellene or Achaean is master of my destiny? 

TALTHYBIUS Ho, servants! haste and bring Cassandra forth to me here,
that I may place her our captain's hands, and then conduct to the
rest of the chiefs the captives each hath had assigned. Ha what is
the blaze of torches there within? What do these Trojan dames? Are
they firing the chambers, because they must leave this land and be
carried away to Argos? Are they setting themselves aflame in their
longing for death? Of a truth the free bear their troubles in cases
like this with a stiff neck. Ho, there! open! lest their deed, which
suits them well but finds small favour with the Achaeans, bring blame
on me. 

HECUBA 'Tis not that they are setting aught ablaze, but my child
Cassandra, frenzied maid, comes rushing wildly hither.  (Enter CASSANDRA
carrying torches)  

CASSANDRA Bring the light, uplift and show its flame! I am doing
the god's service, see! I making his shrine to glow with tapers bright.
O Hymen, king of marriage! blest is the bridegroom; blest am I also,
the maiden soon to wed a princely lord in Argos. Hail Hymen, king
of marriage! Since thou, my mother, art ever busied with tears and
lamentations in thy mourning for my father's death and for our country
dear, I at my own nuptials am making this torch to blaze and show
its light, in thy honour, O Hymen, king of marriage! Grant thy light
too, Hecate, at the maiden's wedding, as the custom is. Nimbly lift
the foot aloft, lead on the dance, with cries of joy, as if to greet
my father's happy fate. To dance I hold a sacred duty; come, Phoebus,
lead the way, for 'tis in thy temple mid thy bay-trees that I minister.
Hail Hymen, god of marriage! Hymen, hail! Come, mother mine, and join
the dance, link thy steps with me, and circle in the gladsome measure,
now here, now there. Salute the bride on her wedding-day with hymns
and cries of joy. Come, ye maids of Phrygia in raiment fair, sing
my marriage with the husband fate ordains that I should wed.

CHORUS Hold the frantic maiden, royal mistress mine, lest with nimble
foot she rush to the Argive army. 

HECUBA Thou god of fire,'tis thine to light the bridal torch for
men, but piteous is the flame thou kindlest here, beyond my blackest
bodings. Ah, my child! how little did I ever dream that such would
be thy marriage, a captive, and of Argos tool Give up the torch to
me; thou dost not bear its blaze aright in thy wild frantic course,
nor have thy afflictions left thee in thy sober senses, but still
art thou as frantic as before. Take in those torches, Trojan friends,
and for her wedding madrigals weep your tears instead. 

CASSANDRA O mother, crown my head with victor's wreaths; rejoice
in my royal match; lead me to my lord; nay, if thou find me loth at
all, thrust me there by force; for if Loxias be indeed a prophet,
Agamemnon, that famous king of the Achaeans, will find in me a bride
more fraught with woe to him than Helen. For I will slay him and lay
waste his home to avenge my father's and my bretheren's death. But
of the deed itself I will not speak; nor will I tell of that axe which
shall sever my neck and the necks of others, or of the conflict ending
in a mother's death, which my marriage shall cause, nor of the overthrow
of Atreus' house; but I, for all my frenzy, will so far rise above
my frantic fit, that I will prove this city happier far than those
Achaeans, who for the sake of one woman and one man's love of her
have lost a countless host in seeking Helen. Their captain too, whom
men call wise, hath lost for what he hated most what most he prized,
yielding to his brother for a woman's sake-and she a willing prize
whom no man forced-the joy he had of his own children in his home.
For from the day that they did land upon Scamander's strand, their
doom began, not for loss of stolen frontier nor yet for fatherland
with frowning towers; whomso Ares slew, those never saw their babes
again, nor were they shrouded for the tomb by hand of wife, but in
a foreign land they lie. At home the case was still the same; wives
were dying widows, parents were left childless in their homes, having
reared their sons for others, and none is left to make libations of
blood upon the ground before their tombs. Truly to such praise as
this their host can make an ample claim. Tis better to pass their
shame in silence by, nor be mine the Muse to tell that evil tale.
But the Trojans were dying, first for their fatherland, fairest fame
to win; whomso the sword laid low, all these found friends to bear
their bodies home and were laid to rest in the bosom of their native
land, their funeral rites all duly paid by duteous hands. And all
such Phrygians as escaped the warrior's death lived ever day by day
with wife and children by them-joys the Achaeans had left behind.
As for Hector and his griefs, prithee hear how stands the case; he
is dead and gone, but still his fame remains as bravest of the brave,
and this was a result of the Achaeans' coming; for had they remained
at home, his worth would have gone unnoticed. So too with Paris, he
married the daughter of Zeus, whereas, had he never done so, the alliance
he made in his family would have been forgotten. Whoso is wise should
fly from making war; but if he be brought to this pass, a noble death
will crown his city with glory, a coward's end with shame. Wherefore,
mother mine, thou shouldst not pity thy country or my spousal, for
this my marriage will destroy those whom thou and I most hate.

CHORUS How sweetly at thy own sad lot thou smilest, chanting a strain,
which, spite of thee, may prove thee wrong! 

TALTHYBIUS Had not Apollo turned thy wits astray, thou shouldst not
for nothing have sent my chiefs with such ominous predictions forth
on their way. But, after all, these lofty minds, reputed wise, are
nothing better than those that are held as naught. For that mighty
king of all Hellas, own son of Atreus, has yielded to a passion for
this mad maiden of all others; though I am poor enough, yet would
I ne'er have chosen such a wife as this. As for thee, since thy senses
are not whole, I give thy taunts 'gainst Argos and thy praise of Troy
to the winds to carry away. Follow me now to the ships to grace the
wedding of our chief. And thou too follow, whensoe'er the son of Laertes
demands thy presence, for thou wilt serve a mistress most discreet,
as all declare who came to Ilium. 

CASSANDRA A clever fellow this menial! Why is it heralds hold the
name they do? All men unite in hating with one common hate the servants
who attend on kings or governments. Thou sayest my mother shall come
to the halls of Odysseus; where then be Apollo's words, so clear to
me in their interpretation, which declare that here she shall die?
What else remains, I will not taunt her with. Little knows he, the
luckless wight, the sufferings that await him; or how these ills I
and my Phrygians endure shall one day seem to him precious as gold.
For beyond the ten long years spent at Troy he shall drag out other
ten and then come to his country all alone, by the route where fell
Charybdis lurks in a narrow channel 'twixt the rocks; past Cyclops
the savage shepherd, and Ligurian Circe that turneth men to swine;
shipwrecked oft upon the salt sea-wave; fain to eat the lotus, and
the sacred cattle of the sun, whose flesh shall utter in the days
to come a human voice, fraught with misery to Odysseus. But to briefly
end this history, he shall descend alive to Hades, and, though he
'scape the waters' flood, yet shall he find a thousand troubles in
his home when he arrives. Enough why do I recount the troubles of
Odysseus? Lead on, that I forthwith may wed my husband for his home
in Hades' halls. Base thou art, and basely shalt thou be buried, in
the dead of night when day is done, thou captain of that host of Danai,
who thinkest so proudly of thy fortune! Yea, and my corpse cast forth
in nakedness shall the rocky chasm with its flood of wintry waters
give to wild beasts to make their meal upon, hard by my husband's
tomb, me the handmaid of Apollo. Farewell, ye garlands of that god
most dear to me! farewell, ye mystic symbols! I here resign your feasts,
my joy in days gone by. Go, I tear ye from my body, that, while yet
mine honour is intact, I may give them to the rushing winds to waft
to thee, my prince of prophecy I Where is yon general's ship? Whither
must I go to take my place thereon? Lose no further time in watching
for a favouring breeze to fill thy sails, doomed as thou art to carry
from this land one of the three avenging spirits. Fare thee well,
mother mine! dry thy tears, O country dear! yet a little while, my
brothers sleeping in the tomb and my own father true, and ye shall
welcome me; yet shall victory crown my advent 'mongst the dead, when
I have overthrown the home of our destroyers, the house of the sons
of Atreus.  (Exeunt TALTHYBIUS and CASSANDRA)  

CHORUS Ye guardians of the grey-haired Hecuba, see how your mistress
is sinking speechless to the ground! Take hold of her! will ye let
her fall, ye worthless slaves? lift up again, from where it lies,
her silvered head. 

HECUBA Leave me lying where I fell, my maidens unwelcome service
grows not welcome ever-my sufferings now, my troubles past, afflictions
yet to come, all claim this lowly posture. Gods of heaven! small help
I find in calling such allies, yet is there something in the form
of invoking heaven, whenso we fall on evil days. First will I descant
upon my former blessings; so shall I inspire the greater pity for
my present woes. Born to royal estate and wedded to a royal lord,
I was the mother of a race of gallant sons; no mere ciphers they,
but Phrygia's chiefest pride, children such as no Trojan or Hellenic
or barbarian mother ever had to boast. All these have I seen slain
by the spear of Hellas, and at their tombs have I shorn off my hair;
with these my eyes I saw their sire, my Priam, butchered on his own
hearth, and my city captured, nor did others bring this bitter news
to me. The maidens I brought up to see chosen for some marriage high,
for strangers have I reared them, and seen them snatched away. Nevermore
can I hope to be seen by them, nor shall my eyes behold them ever
in the days to come. And last, to crown my misery, shall I be brought
to Hellas, a slave in my old age. And there the tasks that least befit
the evening of my life will they impose on me, to watch their gates
and keep the keys, me Hector's mother, or bake their bread, and on
the ground instead of my royal bed lay down my shrunken limbs, with
tattered rags about my wasted frame. a shameful garb for those who
once were prosperous. Ah, woe is me! and this is what I bear and am
to bear for one weak woman's wooing! O my daughter, O Cassandra! whom
gods have summoned to their frenzied train, how cruel the lot that
ends thy virgin days! And thou, Polyxena! my child of sorrow, where,
oh! where art thou? None of all the many sons and daughters have I
born comes to aid a wretched mother. Why then raise me up? What hope
is left us? Guide me, who erst trod so daintily the streets of Troy,
but now am but a slave, to a bed upon the ground, nigh some rocky
ridge, that thence I may cast me down and perish, after I have wasted
my body with weeping. Of all the prosperous crowd, count none a happy
man before he die. 

CHORUS Sing me, Muse, a tale of Troy, a funeral dirge in strains
unheard as yet, with tears the while; for now will I uplift for Troy
a piteous chant, telling how I met my doom and fell a wretched captive
to the Argives by reason of a four-footed beast that moved on wheels,
in the hour that Achaea's sons left at our gates that horse, loud
rumbling on its way, with its trappings of gold and its freight of
warriors; and our folk cried out as they stood upon the rocky citadel,
"Up now ye whose toil is o'er, and drag this sacred image to the shrine
of the Zeus-born maiden, goddess of our Ilium!" Forth from his house
came every youth and every grey-head too; and with songs of joy they
took the fatal snare within. Then hastened all the race of Phrygia
to the gates, to make the goddess a present of an Argive band ambushed
in the polished mountain-pine, Dardania's ruin, a welcome gift to
be to her, the virgin queen of deathless steeds; and with nooses of
cord they dragged it, as it had been a ship's dark hull, to the stone-built
fane of the goddess Pallas, and set it on that floor so soon to drink
our country's blood. But, as they laboured and made merry, came on
the pitchy night; loud the Libyan flute was sounding, and Phrygian
songs awoke, while maidens beat the ground with airy foot, uplifting
their gladsome song; and in the halls a blaze of torchlight shed its
flickering shadows on sleeping eyes. In that hour around the house
was I singing as I danced to that maiden of the hills, the child of
Zeus; when lo! there rang along the town a cry of death which filled
the homes of Troy, and little babes in terror clung about their mothers'
skirts, as forth from their ambush came the warrior-band, the handiwork
of maiden Pallas. Anon the altars ran with Phrygian blood, and desolation
reigned o'er every bed where young men lay beheaded, a glorious crown
for Hellas won, ay, for her, the nurse of youth, but for our Phrygian
fatherland a bitter grief. Look, Hecuba! dost see Andromache advancing
hither on a foreign car? and with her, clasped to her throbbing breast,
is her dear Astyanax, Hector's child.  (Enter ANDROMACHE.)

HECUBA Whither art thou borne, unhappy wife, mounted on that car,
side by side with Hector's brazen arms and Phrygian spoils of war,
with which Achilles' son will deck the shrines of Phthia on his return
from Troy? 

ANDROMACHE My Achaean masters drag me hence. 

HECUBA Woe is thee! 

ANDROMACHE Why dost thou in note of woe utter the dirge that is mine?

HECUBA Ah me! 

ANDROMACHE For these sorrows. 

HECUBA O Zeus! 

ANDROMACHE And for this calamity. 

HECUBA O my children! 

ANDROMACHE Our day is past. 

HECUBA Joy is fled, and Troy o'erthrown. 

ANDROMACHE Woe is me! 

HECUBA Dead too all my gallant sons! 

ANDROMACHE Alack and well-a-day! 

HECUBA Ah me for my- 

ANDROMACHE Misery! 

HECUBA Piteous the fate- 

ANDROMACHE Of our city, 

HECUBA Smouldering in the smoke. 

ANDROMACHE Come, my husband, come to me! 

HECUBA Ah hapless wife! thou callest on my son who lieth in the tomb.

ANDROMACHE Thy wife's defender, come! 

HECUBA Do thou, who erst didst make the Achaeans grieve, eldest of
the sons I bare to Priam in the days gone by, take me to thy rest
in Hades' halls! 

ANDROMACHE Bitter are these regrets, unhappy mother, bitter these
woes to bear; our city ruined, and sorrow evermore to sorrow added,
through the will of angry heaven, since the day that son' of thine
escaped his doom, he that for a bride accursed brought destruction
on the Trojan citadel. There lie the gory corpses of the slain by
the shrine of Pallas for vultures to carry off; and Troy is come to
slavery's yoke. 

HECUBA O my country, O unhappy land, I weep for thee now left behind;
now dost thou behold thy piteous end; and thee, my house, I weep,
wherein I suffered travail. O my children! reft of her city as your
mother is, she now is losing you. Oh, what mourning and what sorrow!
oh, what endless streams of tears in our houses! The dead alone forget
their griefs and never shed a tear. 

CHORUS What sweet relief to sufferers 'tis to weep, to mourn, lament,
and chant the dirge that tells of grief! 

ANDROMACHE Dost thou see this, mother of that Hector, who once laid
low in battle many a son of Argos? 

HECUBA I see that it is heaven's way to exalt what men accounted
naught, and ruin what they most esteemed. 

ANDROMACHE Hence with my child as booty am I borne; the noble are
to slavery brought-a bitter, bitter change. 

HECUBA This is necessity's grim law; it was but now Cassandra was
torn with brutal violence from my arms. 

ANDROMACHE Alas, alas! it seems a second Aias hath appeared to wrong
thy daughter; but there be other ills for thee. 

HECUBA Ay, beyond all count or measure are my sorrows; evil vies
with evil in the struggle to be first. 

ANDROMACHE Thy daughter Polyxena is dead, slain at Achilles' tomb,
an offering to his lifeless corpse. 

HECUBA O woe is me! This is that riddle Talthybius long since told
me, a truth obscurely uttered. 

ANDROMACHE I saw her with mine eyes; so I alighted from the chariot,
and covered her corpse with a mantle, and smote upon my breast.

HECUBA Alas! my child, for thy unhallowed sacrifice! and yet again,
ah me! for this thy shameful death! 

ANDROMACHE Her death was even as it was, and yet that death of hers
was after all a happier fate than this my life. 

HECUBA Death and life are not the same, my child; the one is annihilation,
the other keeps a place for hope. 

ANDROMACHE Hear, O mother of children give ear to what I urge so
well, that I may cheer my drooping spirit. 'Tis all one, I say, ne'er
to have been born and to be dead, and better far is death than life
with misery. For the dead feel no sorrow any more and know no grief;
but he who has known prosperity and has fallen on evil days feels
his spirit straying from the scene of former joys. Now that child
of thine is dead as though she ne'er had seen the light, and little
she recks of her calamity; whereas I, who aimed at a fair repute,
though I won a higher lot than most, yet missed my lick in life. For
all that stamps the wife a woman chaste, I strove to do in Hector's
home. In the first place, whether there is a slur upon a woman, or
whether there is not, the very fact of her not staying at home brings
in its train an evil name; therefore I gave up any wish to do so,
and abode ever within my house, nor would I admit the clever gossip
women love, but conscious of a heart that told an honest tale I was
content therewith. And ever would I keep a silent tongue and modest
eye before my lord; and well I knew where I might rule my lord, and
where 'twas best to yield to him; the fame whereof hath reached the
Achaean host, and proved my ruin; for when I was taken captive, Achilles'
son would have me as his wife, and I must serve in the house of murderers.
And if I set aside my love for Hector, and ope my heart to this new
lord, I shall appear a traitress to the dead, while, if I hate him,
I shall incur my master's displeasure. And yet they say a single night
removes a woman's dislike for her husband; nay, I do hate the woman
who, when she hath lost her former lord, transfers her love by marrying
another. Not e'en the horse, if from his fellow torn, will cheerfully
draw the yoke; and yet the brutes have neither speech nor sense to
help them, and are by nature man's inferiors. O Hector mine! in thee
I found a husband amply dowered with wisdom, noble birth and fortune,
a brave man and a mighty; whilst thou didst take me from my father's
house a spotless bride, thyself the first to make this maiden wife.
But now death hath claimed thee, and I to Hellas am soon to sail,
a captive doomed to wear the yoke of slavery. Hath not then the dead
Polyxena, for whom thou wailest, less evil to bear than I? I have
not so much as hope, the last resource of every human heart, nor do
I beguile myself with dreams of future bliss, the very thought whereof
is sweet. 

CHORUS Thou art in the self-same plight as I; thy lamentations for
thyself remind me of my own sad case. 

HECUBA I never yet have set foot on a ship's deck, though I have
seen such things in pictures and know of them from hearsay. Now sailors,
if there come a storm of moderate force, are all eagerness to save
themselves by toil; one at the tiller stands, another sets himself
to work the sheets, a third meantime is baling out the ship; but if
tempestuous waves arise to overwhelm them, they yield to fortune and
commit themselves to the driving billows. Even so I, by reason of
my countless troubles, am dumb and forbear to say a word; for Heaven
with its surge of misery is too strong for me. Cease, Oh cease, my
darling child, to speak of Hector's fate; no tears of thine can save
him; honour thy present lord, offering thy sweet nature as the bait
to win him. If thou do this, thou wilt cheer thy friends as well as
thyself, and thou shalt rear my Hector's child to lend stout aid to
Ilium, that so thy children in the after-time may build her up again,
and our city yet be stablished. But lo! our talk must take a different
turn; who is this Achaean menial I see coming hither, sent to tell
us of some new design?  (Enter TALTHYBIUS.)  

TALTHYBIUS Oh hate me not, thou that erst wert Hector's wife, the
bravest of the Phrygians! for my tongue would fain not tell that which
the Danai and sons of Pelops both command. 

ANDROMACHE What is it? Thy prelude bodeth evil news. 

TALTHYBIUS 'Tis decreed thy son is-how can I tell my news?

ANDROMACHE Surely not to have a different master from me?

TALTHYBIUS None of all Achaea's chiefs shall ever lord it over him.

ANDROMACHE Is it their will to leave him here, a remnant yet of Phrygia's
race? 

TALTHYBIUS I know no words to break the sorrow lightly to thee.

ANDROMACHE I thank thee for thy consideration, unless indeed thou
hast good news to tell. 

TALTHYBIUS They mean to slay thy son; there is my hateful message
to thee. 

ANDROMACHE O God! this is worse tidings than my forced marriage.

TALTHYBIUS So spake Odysseus to the assembled Hellenes, and his word
prevails. 

ANDROMACHE Oh once again ah me there is no measure in the woes I
bear. 

TALTHYBIUS He said they should not rear so brave a father's son.

ANDROMACHE May such counsels yet prevail about children of his!

TALTHYBIUS From Troy's battlements he must be thrown. Let it be even
so, and thou wilt show more wisdom; cling not to him, but bear thy
sorrows with heroic heart, nor in thy weakness deem that thou art
strong. For nowhere hast thou any help; consider this thou must; thy
husband and thy city are no more, so thou art in our power, and I
alone am match enough for one weak woman; wherefore I would not see
thee bent on strife, or any course to bring thee shame or hate, nor
would I hear thee rashly curse the Achaeans. For if thou say aught
whereat the host grow wroth, this child will find no burial nor pity
either. But if thou hold thy peace and with composure take thy fate,
thou wilt not leave his corpse unburied, and thyself wilt find more
favour with the Achaeans. 

ANDROMACHE My child! my own sweet babe and priceless treasure! thy
death the foe demands, and thou must leave thy wretched mother. That
which saves the lives of others, proves thy destruction, even thy
sire's nobility; to thee thy father's valiancy has proved no boon.
O the woeful wedding rites, that brought me erst to Hector's home,
hoping to be the mother of a son that should rule o'er Asia's fruitful
fields instead of serving as a victim to the sons of Danaus! Dost
weep, my babe? dost know thy hapless fate? Why clutch me with thy
hands and to my garment cling, nestling like a tender chick beneath
my wing? Hector will not rise again and come gripping his famous spear
to bring thee salvation; no kinsman of thy sire appears, nor might
of Phrygian hosts; one awful headlong leap from the dizzy height and
thou wilt dash out thy life with none to pity thee Oh to clasp thy
tender limbs, a mother's fondest joy! Oh to breathe thy fragrant breath!
In vain it seems these breasts did suckle thee, wrapped in thy swaddling-clothes;
all for naught I used to toil and wore myself away! Kiss thy mother
now for the last time, nestle to her that bare thee, twine thy arms
about my neck and join thy lips to mine! O ye Hellenes, cunning to
devise new forms of cruelty, why slay this child who never wronged
any? Thou daughter of Tyndarus, thou art no child of Zeus, but sprung,
I trow, of many a sire, first of some evil demon, next of Envy, then
of Murder and of Death, and every horror that the earth begets. That
Zeus was never sire of thine I boldly do assert, bane as thou hast
been to many a Hellene and barbarian too. Destruction catch thee!
Those fair eyes of thine have brought a shameful ruin on the fields
of glorious Troy. Take the babe and bear him hence, hurl him down
if so ye list, then feast upon his flesh! 'Tis heaven's high will
we perish, and I cannot ward the deadly stroke from my child. Hide
me and my misery; cast me into the ship's hold; for 'tis to a fair
wedding I am going, now that I have lost my child! 

CHORUS Unhappy Troy! thy thousands thou hast lost for one woman's
sake and her accursed wooing. 

TALTHYBIUS Come, child, leave fond embracing of thy woful mother,
and mount the high coronal of thy ancestral towers, there to draw
thy parting breath, as is ordained. Take him hence. His should the
duty be to do such herald's work, whose heart knows no pity and who
loveth ruthlessness more than my soul doth.  (Exeunt ANDROMACHE and
TALTHYBIUS with ASTYANAX.)  

HECUBA O child, son of my hapless boy, an unjust fate robs me and
thy mother of thy life. How is it with me? What can I do for thee,
my luckless babe? for thee I smite upon my head and beat my breast,
my only gift; for that alone is in my power. Woe for my city! woe
for thee! Is not our cup full? What is wanting now to our utter and
immediate ruin? 

CHORUS O Telamon, King of Salamis, the feeding ground of bees, who
hast thy home in a sea-girt isle that lieth nigh the holy hills where
first Athena made the grey olive-branch to appear, a crown for heavenly
heads and a glory unto happy Athens, thou didst come in knightly brotherhood
with that great archer, Alcemena's son, to sack our city Ilium, in
days gone by, on thy advent from Hellas, what time he led the chosen
flower of Hellas, vexed for the steeds denied him, and at the fair
stream of Simois he stayed his sea-borne ship and fastened cables
to the stern, and forth therefrom he took the bow his hand could deftly
shoot, to be the doom of Laomedon; and with the ruddy breath of fire
he wasted the masonry squared by Phoebus' line and chisel, and sacked
the land of Troy; so twice in two attacks hath the bloodstained spear
destroyed Dardania's walls. 

In vain, it seems, thou Phrygian boy, pacing with dainty step amid
thy golden chalices, dost thou fill high the cup of Zeus, a service
passing fair; seeing that the land of thy birth is being consumed
by fire. The shore re-echoes to our cries; and, as a bird bewails
its young, so we bewail our husbands or our children, or our grey-haired
mothers. The dew-fed springs where thou didst bathe, the course where
thou didst train, are now no more; but thou beside the throne of Zeus
art sitting with a calm, sweet smile upon thy fair young face, while
the spear of Hellas lays the land of Priam waste. Ah! Love, Love,
who once didst seek these Dardan halls, deep-seated in the hearts
of heavenly gods, how high didst thou make Troy to tower in those
days, allying her with deities! But I will cease to urge reproaches
against Zeus; for white-winged dawn, whose light to man is dear, turned
a baleful eye upon our land and watched the ruin of our citadel, though
she had within her bridal bower a husband from this land, whom on
a day a car of gold and spangled stars caught up and carried thither,
great source of hope to his native country; but all the love the gods
once had for Troy is passed away.  (Enter MENELAUS.)  

MENELAUS Hail! thou radiant orb by whose fair light I now shall capture
her that was my wife, e'en Helen; for I am that Menelaus, who hath
toiled so hard, I and Achaea's host. To Troy I came, not so much as
men suppose to take this woman, but to punish him who from my house
stole my wife, traitor to my hospitality. But he, by heaven's will,
hath paid the penalty, ruined, and his country too, by the spear of
Hellas. And I am come to bear that Spartan woman hence-wife I have
no mind to call her, though she once was mine; for now she is but
one among the other Trojan dames who share these tents as captives.
For they-the very men who toiled to take her with the spear-have granted
her to me to slay, or, if I will, to spare and carry back with me
to Argos. Now my purpose is not to put her to death in Troy, but to
carry her to Hellas in my seaborne ship, and then surrender her to
death, a recompense to all whose friends were slain in Ilium. Ho!
my trusty men, enter the tent, and drag her out to me by her hair
with many a murder foul; and when a favouring breeze shall blow, to
Hellas will we convey her. 

HECUBA O thou that dost support the earth and restest thereupon,
whosoe'er thou art, a riddle past our ken! be thou Zeus, or natural
necessity, or man's intellect, to thee I pray; for, though thou treadest
o'er a noiseless path, all thy dealings with mankind are by justice
guided. 

MENELAUS How now? Strange the prayer thou offerest unto heaven!

HECUBA I thank thee, Menelaus, if thou wilt slay that wife of thine.
Yet shun the sight of her, lest she smite thee with regret. For she
ensnares the eyes of men, o'erthrows their towns, and burns their
houses, so potent are her witcheries! Well I know her; so dost thou
and those her victims too.  (Enter HELEN.)  

HELEN Menelaus! this prelude well may fill me with alarm; for I am
haled with violence by thy servants' hands and brought before these
tents. Still, though I am well-nigh sure thou hatest me, yet would
I fain inquire what thou and Hellas have decided about my life.

MENELAUS To judge thy case required no great exactness; the host
with one consent-that host whom thou didst wrong-handed thee over
to me to die. 

HELEN May I answer this decision, proving that my death, if to die
I am, will be unjust? 

MENELAUS I came not to argue, but to slay thee. 

HECUBA Hear her, Menelaus; let her not die for want of that, and
let me answer her again, for thou knowest naught of her villainies
in Troy; and the whole case, if thus summed up, will insure her death
against all chance of an escape. 

MENELAUS This boon needs leisure; still, if she wishes to speak,
the leave is given. Yet will I grant her this because of thy words,
that she may hear them, and not for her own sake. 

HELEN Perhaps thou wilt not answer me, from counting me a foe, whether
my words seem good or ill. Yet will I put my charges and thine over
against each other, and then reply to the accusations I suppose thou
wilt advance against me. First, then, she was the author of these
troubles by giving birth to Paris; next, old Priam ruined Troy and
me, because he did not slay his babe Alexander, baleful semblance
of a fire-brand, long ago. Hear what followed. This Paris was to judge
the claims of three rival goddesses; so Pallas offered him command
of all the Phrygians, and the destruction of Hellas; Hera promised
he should spread his dominion over Asia, and the utmost bounds of
Europe, if he would decide for her; but Cypris spoke in rapture of
my loveliness, and promised him this boon, if she should have the
preference o'er those twain for beauty; now mark the inference I deduce
from this; Cypris won the day o'er them, and thus far hath my marriage
proved of benefit to Hellas, that ye are not subject to barbarian
rule, neither vanquished in the strife, nor yet by tyrants crushed.
What Hellas gained, was ruin to me, a victim for my beauty sold, and
now am I reproached for that which should have set a crown upon my
head. But thou wilt say I am silent on the real matter at issue, how
it was I started forth and left thy house by stealth. With no mean
goddess at his side he came, my evil genius, call him Alexander or
Paris, as thou wilt; and him didst thou, thrice guilty wretch, leave
behind thee in thy house, and sail away from Sparta to the land of
Crete. Enough of this! For all that followed I must question my own
heart, not thee; what frantic thought led me to follow the stranger
from thy house, traitress to my country and my home? Punish the goddess,
show thyself more mighty e'en than Zeus, who, though he lords it o'er
the other gods, is yet her slave; wherefore I may well be pardoned.
Still, from hence thou mightest draw a specious argument against me;
when Paris died, and Earth concealed his corpse, I should have left
his house and sought the Argive fleet, since my marriage was no longer
in the hands of gods. That was what I fain had done; yea, and the
warders on the towers and watchmen on the walls can bear me witness,
for oft they found me seeking to let myself down stealthily by cords
from the battlements; but there was that new husband, Deiphobus, that
carried me off by force to be his wife against the will of Troy. How
then, my lord, could I be justly put to death by thee, with any show
of right, seeing that he wedded me against my will, and those my other
natural gifts have served a bitter slavery, instead of leading on
to triumph? If 'tis thy will indeed to master gods, that very wish
displays thy folly. 

CHORUS O my royal mistress, defend thy children's and thy country.'s
cause, bringing to naught her persuasive arguments, for she pleads
well in spite of all her villainy; 'tis monstrous this! 

HECUBA First will I take up the cause of those goddesses, and prove
how she perverts the truth. For I can ne'er believe that Hera or the
maiden Pallas would have been guilty of such folly, as to sell, the
one, her Argos to barbarians, or that Pallas e'er would make her Athens
subject to the Phrygians, coming as they did in mere wanton sport
to Ida to contest the palm of beauty. For why should goddess Hera
set her heart so much on such a prize? Was it to win a nobler lord
than Zeus? or was Athena bent on finding 'mongst the gods a husband,
she who in her dislike of marriage won from her sire the boon of remaining
unwed? Seek not to impute folly to the goddesses, in the attempt to
gloze o'er thy own sin; never wilt thou persuade the wise. Next thou
hast said-what well may make men jeer-that Cypris came with my son
to the house of Menelaus. Could she not have stayed quietly in heaven
and brought thee and Amyclae to boot to Ilium? Nay! my son was passing
fair, and when thou sawest him thy fancy straight became thy Cypris;
for every sensual act that men commit, they lay upon this goddess,
and rightly does her name of Aphrodite begin the word for "senselessness";
so when thou didst catch sight of him in gorgeous foreign garb, ablaze
with gold, thy senses utterly forsook thee. Yea, for in Argos thou
hadst moved in simple state, but, once free of Sparta, 'twas thy fond
hope to deluge by thy lavish outlay Phrygia's town, that flowed with
gold; nor was the palace of Menelaus rich enough for thy luxury to
riot in. Ha! my son carried thee off by force, so thou savest; what
Spartan saw this? what cry for help didst thou ever raise, though
Castor was still alive, a vigorous youth, and his brother also, not
yet amid the stars? Then when thou wert come to Troy, and the Argives
were on thy track, and the mortal combat was begun, whenever tidings
came to thee of Menelaus' prowess, him wouldst thou praise, to grieve
my son, because he had so powerful a rival in his love; but if so
the Trojans prospered, Menelaus was nothing to thee. Thy eye was fixed
on Fortune, and by such practice wert thou careful to follow in her
steps, careless of virtue's cause. And then, in spite of all, thou
dost assert that thou didst try to let thyself down from the towers
by stealth with twisted cords, as if loth to stay? Pray then, wert
thou ever found fastening the noose about thy neck, or whetting the
knife, as noble wife would have done in regret for her former husband?
And yet full oft I advised thee saying, "Get thee gone, daughter,
and let my sons take other brides; I will help thee to steal away,
and convey thee to the Achaean fleet; oh end the strife 'twixt us
and Hellas!" But this was bitter in thy ears. For thou wert wantoning
in Alexander's house, fain to have obeisance done thee by barbarians.
Yes, 'twas a proud time for thee; and now after all this thou hast
bedizened thyself, and come forth and hast dared to appear under the
same sky as thy husband, revolting wretchl Better hadst thou come
in tattered raiment, cowering humbly in terror, with hair shorn short,
if for thy past sins thy feeling were one of shame rather than effrontery.
O Menelaus, hear the conclusion of my argument; crown Hellas by slaying
her as she deserves, and establish this law for all others of her
sex, e'en death to every traitress to her husband. 

CHORUS Avenge thee, Menelaus, on thy wife, as is worthy of thy home
and ancestors, clear thyself from the reproach of effeminacy at the
lips of Hellas, and let thy foes see thy spirit. 

MENELAUS Thy thoughts with mine do coincide, that she, without constraint,
left my palace, and sought a stranger's love, and now Cypris is introduced
for mere bluster. Away to those who shall stone thee, and by thy speedy
death requite the weary toils of the Achaeans, that thou mayst learn
not to bring shame on me! 

HELEN Oh, by thy knees, I implore thee, impute not that heaven-sent
affliction to me, nor slay me; pardon, I entreat! 

HECUBA Be not false to thy allies, whose death this woman caused;
on their behalf, and for my children's sake, I sue to thee.

MENELAUS Peace, reverend dame; to her I pay no heed. Lo! I bid my
servants take her hence, aboard the ship, wherein she is to sail.

HECUBA Oh never let her set foot within the same ship as thee.

MENELAUS How now? is she heavier than of yore? 

HECUBA Who loveth once, must love alway. 

MENELAUS Why, that depends how those we love are minded. But thy
wish shall be granted; she shall not set foot upon the same ship with
me; for thy advice is surely sound; and when she comes to Argos she
shall die a shameful death as is her due, and impress the need of
chastity on all her sex; no easy task; yet shall her fate strike their
foolish hearts with terror, e'en though they be more lost to shame
than she.  (Exit MENELAUS, dragging HELEN with him.)  

CHORUS So then thou hast delivered into Achaea's hand, O Zeus, thy
shrine in Ilium and thy fragrant altar, the offerings of burnt sacrifice
with smoke of myrrh to heaven uprising, and holy Pergamos, and glens
of Ida tangled with ivy's growth, where rills of melting snow pour
down their flood, a holy sunlit land that bounds the world and takes
the god's first rays! Gone are thy sacrifices! gone the dancer's cheerful
shout! gone the vigils of the gods as night closed in! Thy images
of carven gold are now no more; and Phrygia's holy festivals, twelve
times a year, at each full moon, are ended now. 'Tis this that filleth
me with anxious thought whether thou, O king, seated on the sky, thy
heavenly throne, carest at all that my city is destroyed, a prey to
the furious fiery blast. Ah! my husband, fondly loved, thou art a
wandering spectre; unwashed, unburied lies thy corpse, while o'er
the sea the ship sped by wings will carry me to Argos, land of steeds,
where stand Cyclopian walls of stone upreared to heaven. There in
the gate the children gather, hanging round their mothers' necks,
and weep their piteous lamentation, "O mother, woe is me! torn from
thy sight Achaeans bear me away from thee to their dark ship to row
me o'er the deep to sacred Salamis or to the hill' on the Isthmus,
that o'erlooks two seas, the key to the gates of Pelops." Oh may the
blazing thunderbolt, hurled in might from its holy home, smite the
barque of Menelaus full amidships as it is crossing the Aegean main,
since he is carrying me away in bitter sorrow from the shores of Ilium
to be a slave in Hellas, while the daughter of Zeus still keeps her
golden mirrors, delight-of maidens' hearts. Never may he reach his
home in Laconia or his father's hearth and home, nor come to the town
of Pitane or the temple of the goddess' with the gates of bronze,
having taken as his captive her whose marriage brought disgrace on
Hellas through its length and breadth and woful anguish on the streams
of Simois! Ah me! ah me! new troubles on my country fall, to take
the place of those that still are fresh! Behold, ye hapless wives
of Troy, the corpse of Astyanax! whom the Danai have cruelly slain
by hurling him from the battlements.  (Enter TALTHYBIUS and attendants,
bearing the corpse of ASTYANAX on HECTOR's shield.)  

TALTHYBIUS Hecuba, one ship alone delays its plashing oars, and it
is soon to sail to the shores of Phthia freighted with the remnant
of the spoils of Achilles' son; for Neoptolemus is already out at
sea, having heard that new calamities have befallen Peleus, for Acastus,
son of Pelias, hath banished him the realm. Wherefore he is gone,
too quick to indulge in any delay, and with him goes Andromache, who
drew many a tear from me what time she started hence, wailing her
country and crying her farewell to Hector's tomb. And she craved her
master leave to bury this poor dead child of Hector who breathed his
last when from the turrets hurled, entreating too that he would not
carry this shield, the terror of the Achaeans-this shield with plates
of brass wherewith his father would gird himself-to the home of Peleus
or to the same bridal bower whither she, herself the mother of this
corpse, would be led, a bitter sight to her, but let her bury the
child therein instead of in a coffin of cedar or a tomb of stone,
and to thy hands commit the corpse that thou mayst deck it with robes
and garlands as best thou canst with thy present means; for she is
far away and her master's haste prevented her from burying the child
herself. So we, when thou the corpse hast decked, will heap the earth
above and set thereon a spear; but do thou with thy best speed perform
thy allotted task; one toil however have I already spared thee, for
I crossed Scamander's stream and bathed the corpse and cleansed its
wounds. But now will I go to dig a grave for him, that our united
efforts shortening our task may speed our ship towards home.  (Exit
TALTHYBIUS.)  

HECUBA Place the shield upon the ground, Hector's shield so deftly
rounded, a piteous sight, a bitter grief for me to see. O ye Achaeans,
more reason have ye to boast of your prowess than your wisdom I Why
have ye in terror of this child been guilty of murder never matched
before? Did ye fear that some day he would rear again the fallen walls
of Troy? it seems then ye were nothing after all, when, though Hector's
fortunes in the war were prosperous and he had ten thousand other
arms to back him, we still were daily overmatched; and yet, now that
our city is taken and every Phrygian slain, ye fear a tender babe
like this! Out upon his fear! say I, who fears, but never yet hath
reasoned out the cause. Ah! my beloved, thine is a piteous death indeed!
Hadst thou died for thy city, when thou hadst tasted of the sweets
of manhood, of marriage, and of godlike power o'er others, then wert
thou blest, if aught herein is blest. But now after one glimpse, one
dream thereof thou knowest them no more, my child, and hast no joy
of them, though heir to all. Ah, poor babe! how sadly have thy own
father's walls, those towers that Loxias reared, shorn from thy head
the locks thy mother fondled, and so oft caressed, from which through
fractured bones the face of murder grins-briefly to dismiss my shocking
theme. O hands, how sweet the likeness ye retain of his father, and
yet ye lie limp in your sockets before me! Dear mouth, so often full
of words of pride, death hath closed thee, and thou hast not kept
the promise thou didst make, when nestling in my robe, "Ah, mother
mine, many a lock of my hair will I cut off for thee, and to thy tomb
will lead my troops of friends, taking a fond farewell of thee." But
now 'tis not thy hand that buries me, but I, on whom is come old age
with loss of home and children, am burying thee, a tender child untimely
slain. Ah me! those kisses numberless, the nurture that I gave to
thee, those sleepless nights-they all are lost! What shall the bard
inscribe-upon thy tomb about thee? "Argives once for fear of him slew
this child!" Foul shame should that inscription be to Hellas. O child,
though thou hast no part in all thy father's wealth, yet shalt thou
have his brazen shield wherein to find a tomb. Ah! shield that didst
keep safe the comely arm of Hector, now hast thou lost thy valiant
keeper! How fair upon thy handle lies his imprint, and on the rim,
that circles round the targe, are marks of sweat, that trickled oft
from Hector's brow as he pressed it 'gainst his beard in battle's
stress. Come, bring forth, from such store as we have, adornment for
the hapless dead, for fortune gives no chance now for offerings fair;
yet of such as I possess, shalt thou receive these gifts. Foolish
mortal he! who thinks his luck secure and so rejoices; for fortune,
like a madman in her moods, springs towards this man, then towards
that; and none ever experiences the same unchanging luck.

CHORUS Lo! all is ready and they are bringing at thy bidding from
the spoils of Troy garniture to put upon the dead. 

HECUBA Ah! my child, 'tis not as victor o'er thy comrades with horse
or bow-customs Troy esteems, without pursuing them to excess-that
Hector's mother decks thee now with ornaments from the store that
once was thine, though now hath Helen, whom the gods abhor, reft thee
of thine own, yea, and robbed thee of thy life and caused thy house
to perish root and branch. 

CHORUS Woe! thrice woe! my heart is touched, and thou the cause,
my mighty prince in days now passed! 

HECUBA About thy body now I swathe this Phrygian robe of honour,
which should have clad thee on thy marriage-day, wedded to the noblest
of Asia's daughters. Thou too, dear shield of Hector, victorious parent
of countless triumphs past, accept thy crown, for though thou share
the dead child's tomb, death cannot touch thee; for thou dost merit
honours far beyond those arms' that the crafty knave Odysseus won.

CHORUS Alas! ah me! thee, O child, shall earth take to her breast,
a cause for bitter weeping. Mourn, thou mother! 

HECUBA Ah me! 

CHORUS Wail for the dead. 

HECUBA Woe is me! 

CHORUS Alas! for thy unending sorrow! 

HECUBA Thy wounds in part will I bind up with bandages, a wretched
leech in name alone, without reality; but for the rest, thy sire must
look to that amongst the dead. 

CHORUS Smite, oh smite upon thy head with frequent blow of hand.
Woe is me! 

HECUBA My kind, good friends! 

CHORUS Speak out, good the word that was on thy lips. 

HECUBA It seems the only things that heaven concerns itself about
are my troubles and Troy hateful in their eyes above all other cities.
In vain did we sacrifice to them. Had not the god caught us in his
grip and plunged us headlong 'neath the earth, we should have been
unheard of, nor ever sung in Muses' songs, furnishing to bards of
after-days a subject for their minstrelsy. Go, bury now in his poor
tomb the dead, wreathed all duly as befits a corpse. And yet I deem
it makes but little difference to the dead, although they get a gorgeous
funeral; for this is but a cause of idle pride to the living.

The corpse is carried off to burial 

CHORUS Alas! for thy unhappy mother, who o'er thy corpse hath closed
the high hopes of her life! Born of a noble stock, counted most happy
in thy lot, ah! what a tragic death is thine! Ha! who are those I
see on yonder pinnacles darting to and fro with flaming torches in
their hands? Some new calamity will soon on Troy alight.  (Enter TALTHYBIUS
above. Soldiers are seen on the battlements of Troy, torch in hand.)

TALTHYBIUS Ye captains, whose allotted task it is to fire this town
of Priam, to you I speak. No longer keep the firebrand idle in your
hands, but launch the flame, that when we have destroyed the city
of Ilium we may set forth in gladness on our homeward voyage from
Troy. And you, ye sons of Troy-to let my orders take at once a double
form-start for the Achaean ships for your departure hence, soon as
ever the leaders of the host blow loud and clear upon the trumpet.
And thou, unhappy grey haired dame, follow; for yonder come servants
from Odysseus to fetch thee, for to him thou art assigned by lot to
be a slave far from thy country. 

HECUBA Ah, woe is me! This surely is the last, the utmost limit this,
of all my sorrows; forth from my land I go; my city is ablaze with
flame. Yet, thou aged foot, make one painful struggle to hasten, that
I may say a farewell to this wretched town. O Troy, that erst hadst
such a grand career amongst barbarian towns, soon wilt thou be reft
of that splendid name. Lo! they are burning thee, and leading us e'en
now from our land to slavery. Great gods! Yet why call on the gods?
They did not hearken e'en aforetime to our call. Come, let us rush
into the flames, for to die with my country in its blazing ruin were
a noble death for me. 

TALTHYBIUS Thy sorrows drive thee frantic, poor lady. Go, lead her
hence, make no delay, for ye must deliver her into the hand of Odysseus,
conveying to him his prize. 

HECUBA O son of Cronos, prince of Phrygia, father of our race, dost
thou behold our sufferings now, unworthy of the stock of Dardanus?

CHORUS He sees them, but our mighty city is a city no more, and Troy's
day is done. 

HECUBA Woe! thrice woe upon me! Ilium is ablaze; the homes of Pergamos
and its towering walls are now one sheet of flame. 

CHORUS As the smoke soars on wings to heaven, so sinks our city to
the 'ground before the spear. With furious haste both fire and foeman's
spear devour each house. 

HECUBA Hearken, my children, hear your mother's voice. 

CHORUS Thou art calling on the dead with voice of lamentation.

HECUBA Yea, as I stretch my aged limbs upon the ground, and beat
upon the earth with both my hands. 

CHORUS I follow thee and kneel, invoking from the nether world my
hapless husband. 

HECUBA I am being dragged and hurried away. 

CHORUS O the sorrow of that cry! 

HECUBA From my own dear country, to dwell beneath a master's roof.
Woe is me! O Priam, Priam, unburied, left without a friend, naught
dost thou know of my cruel fate. 

CHORUS No, for o'er his eyes black death hath drawn his pall-a holy
man by sinners slain! 

HECUBA Woe for the temples of the gods! Woe for our dear city!

CHORUS Woe! 

HECUBA Murderous flame and foeman's spear are now your lot.

CHORUS Soon will ye tumble to your own loved soil, and be forgotten.

HECUBA And the dust, mounting to heaven on wings like smoke, will
rob me of the sight of my home. 

CHORUS The name of my country will pass into obscurity; all is scattered
far and wide, and hapless Troy has ceased to be. 

HECUBA Did ye hear that and know its purport? 

CHORUS Aye, 'twas the crash of the citadel. 

HECUBA The shock will whelm our city utterly. O woe is me! trembling,
quaking limbs, support my footsteps! away! to face the day that begins
thy slavery. 

CHORUS Woe for our unhappy town! And yet to the Achaean fleet advance.

HECUBA Woe for thee, O land that nursed my little babes!

CHORUS Ah! woe!  (Exeunt OMNES.) 